

===== PAGE 1 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT
1
SDOA-Net: An Efficient Deep Learning-Based
DOA Estimation Network for Imperfect Array
Peng Chen, Senior Member, IEEE, Zhimin Chen, Member, IEEE, Liang Liu, Senior Member, IEEE,
Yun Chen, Senior Member, IEEE, Xianbin Wang, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—The estimation of direction of arrival (DOA) is
a crucial issue in conventional radar, wireless communication,
and integrated sensing and communication (ISAC) systems.
However, low-cost systems often suffer from imperfect factors,
such as antenna position perturbations, mutual coupling effect,
inconsistent gains/phases, and non-linear amplifier effect, which
can significantly degrade the performance of DOA estimation.
This paper proposes a DOA estimation method named super-
resolution DOA network (SDOA-Net) based on deep learning
(DL) to characterize the realistic array more accurately. Unlike
existing DL-based DOA methods, SDOA-Net uses sampled re-
ceived signals instead of covariance matrices as input to extract
data features. Furthermore, SDOA-Net produces a vector that
is independent of the DOA of the targets but can be used to
estimate their spatial spectrum. Consequently, the same training
network can be applied to any number of targets, reducing the
complexity of implementation. The proposed SDOA-Net with
a low-dimension network structure also converges faster than
existing DL-based methods. The simulation results demonstrate
that SDOA-Net outperforms existing DOA estimation methods
for imperfect arrays. The SDOA-Net code is available online at
https://github.com/chenpengseu/SDOA-Net.git.
Index Terms—Convolution layer, deep learning, direction
of arrival (DOA) estimation, imperfect array, super-resolution
method.
I. INTRODUCTION
This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation for
Excellent Young Scholars of Jiangsu Province under Grant BK20220128,
the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai under Grant 22ZR1425200, the
Open Fund of State Key Laboratory of Integrated Chips and Systems under
Grant SKLICS-K202305, the National Key R&D Program of China under
Grant 2019YFE0120700, the Open Fund of National Key Laboratory of
Wireless Communications Foundation under Grant IFN20230105, the Open
Fund of National Key Laboratory on Electromagnetic Environmental Effects
and Electro-optical Engineering under Grant JCKYS2023LD6, the Open Fund
of ISN State Key Lab under Grant ISN24-04, and the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 61801112. (Corresponding author: Zhimin
Chen)
Peng Chen is with the State Key Laboratory of Millimeter Waves, Southeast
University, Nanjing 210096, China, and also with State Key Laboratory of
Integrated Chips and Systems, Fudan University, Shanghai 201203, China
(e-mail: chenpengseu@seu.edu.cn).
Zhimin Chen is with the School of Electronic and Information, Shanghai
Dianji University, Shanghai 201306, China, and also with the Department
of Electronic and Information Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong (e-mail: chenzm@sdju.edu.cn).
Liang Liu is with the Department of Electronic and Information Engi-
neering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong (e-mail: liang-
eie.liu@polyu.edu.hk).
Yun Chen is with the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Chips and Systems
and the Microelectronics School, Fudan University, Shanghai 201203, China
(e-mail: chenyun@fudan.edu.cn).
Xianbin Wang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer En-
gineering, Western University, London, ON N6A 5B9, Canada (e-mail:
xianbin.wang@uwo.ca).
D
IRECTION of arrival (DOA) estimation is a fundamental
problem in wireless communications, radar-based ap-
plications, and future integrated sensing and communication
(ISAC) systems [1]–[4], and has been studied for decades.
Typically, the DOA estimation is based on an ideal antenna
array model, without considering any imperfect effect, in-
cluding the mutual coupling effect, inconsistent gains/phases,
non-linear effect, etc. In this ideal scenario, DOA can be
estimated by traditional methods such as the monopulse angle
estimation method [5] and fast Fourier transformation (FFT)-
based methods.
In addition, there have been proposals for super-resolution
estimation methods. Subspace-based methods, such as mul-
tiple signal classification (MUSIC) [6]–[8] and estimation
of signal parameters via rotational invariance techniques
(ESPRIT) [9]–[12], have been suggested. An optimization
problem is formulated in [13] to estimate the DOA consid-
ering the eigenvalues ranking problem. In addition, sparse
reconstruction-based methods have been introduced that take
advantage of the sparsity of signals in the spatial domain.
For example, compressed sensing (CS)-based methods have
been proposed for DOA estimation, including sparse Bayesian
learning-based methods [14]–[21] and mixed ℓ2,0 norm-based
methods [22].
However, the above works did not consider the effect of
imperfect antenna arrays. As a result, the performance of
these algorithms is significantly affected in practical DOA
estimation systems. In the literature, some work has started to
investigate DOA estimation schemes under imperfect antenna
arrays. For example, for an array with mutual coupling, gain
or phase errors, and sensor location errors, a method for
estimating DOA and model errors is proposed in [23]. A
fourth-order parallel factor decomposition model using imper-
fect waveforms is given in [24] to estimate the DOA. Then,
ref. [25] proposes a two-dimensional (2D) DOA estimation
method for an imperfect L-shaped array using active cali-
bration. However, each of the above works only considered
a subset of the imperfect array effects because optimization
over the complicated array model with all imperfect effects
considered is challenging. This motivates us to use the deep
learning (DL) technique for DOA estimation with all imperfect
array effects taken into account because of its efficiency for
training over difficult networks.
In the literature, several works have been done for DL-based
DOA estimation [26]–[29], and they have the advantages of
low computational complexity and high accuracy. There are
some types of DL-based methods:
arXiv:2203.10231v3  [eess.SP]  20 Mar 2024


===== PAGE 2 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT
2
1) The input data is the raw sampled data from the array;
2) The input data is the covariance matrix of the received
signal;
3) The outputs are the directly estimated DOAs;
4) The output is the spatial spectrum and the DOAs are
estimated from the spectrum.
Various DL-based methods have been proposed for DOA
estimation in the literature. In [30,31], the input is the co-
variance matrix, the output is the spectrum, and a sparse
loss function is used to train the network. Ref. [32] uses
the estimated covariance matrix as input and discretizes the
spatial domain into grids to estimate the DOA. A synthetic
dataset is shown in [33], and a CNN-based method is proposed
for the estimation of DOA in the presence of additive noise,
propagation attenuation, and delay. For coherent signals, an
angle separation learning method is proposed in [31], and the
covariance matrix is formulated as input features of the DNN.
In [34], a deep convolution network (DCN) is given for DOA
estimation with the covariance matrix as the undersampled
linear measurements of the spatial spectrum, where the signal
sparsity in the spatial domain is also exploited to improve
estimation performance. A MUSIC-based DOA estimation
method is proposed in [35] using small antenna arrays, where
DL is formulated to reconstruct the signals of a virtual large
antenna array. Ref. [27] gives an offline and online DNN
method for the estimation of DOA in the massive multiple
input multiple output (MIMO) system, where DOA is the
network output and can be estimated directly from the received
signal. For the estimation of DOA with a low signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR), a convolutional neural network (CNN) is
proposed in [36], where the covariance matrix is the input of
the network and shows increased robustness in the presence
of noise. Moreover, a multiple deep CNN is designed in [37],
where each CNN learns the MUSIC spectrum of the received
signal, so a non-linear relationship between the received sensor
data and the angular spectrum is formulated in the network.
For the imperfect array, ref. [38] introduces a DNN framework
to estimate the DOA using a multi-task autoencoder and a
series of parallel multilayer classifiers.
We find that the DL-based DOA estimation methods mainly
use CNN as a typical network structure [39], and the input
is the statistic results such as the covariance matrix. Since
the information in the statistical data limits the estimation
performance, the performance cannot be better using the raw
sampled data. Furthermore, the network output is the estimated
DOAs, and the spatial spectrum cannot be obtained. Therefore,
the network structure should be adjusted with different target
numbers and is not suitable for practical applications. There
are some limitations to existing DL-based methods:
• Since the classic DOA estimation algorithms, such as
MUSIC, is just based on the covariance matrices of
the received signals, most existing ML-based schemes
use these covariance matrices as the input data to train
the network. However, the covariance matrices are not
sufficient for the optimal estimator design, in general. As
a result, the input data used in these works do not preserve
all useful information.
• Furthermore, the output of existing ML-based DOA es-
timation schemes is usually the spatial spectrum of the
targets. In this case, the training network depends on the
number of targets; that is, different networks should be
trained given a different number of targets. This is of high
complexity in practice.
• Furthermore, when the spatial spectrum is used, we must
discretize the DOAs into grids, and the possible DOA
must be on the discretized grids exactly. More girds as the
output must be used for high accuracy, and the network
will become more complex and difficult to train.
In this paper, we propose a DNN network based on CNN,
i.e., super-resolution DOA network (SDOA-Net), to overcome
the above-mentioned difficulties in the DOA estimation. The
proposed SDOA-Net is used for the performance evaluation
of imperfect arrays under realistic conditions. Compared with
existing methods, the proposed SDOA-Net can achieve better
estimation performance with lower complexity. The contribu-
tions of this paper are given as follows:
1) A system model with imperfect array effects for the
DOA estimation is formulated. The imperfect effect
includes the position perturbation, the inconsistent gains,
the inconsistent phases, the mutual coupling effect, and
the nonlinear effect, etc. As a result, our results are
directly applicable to a practical system.
2) A DL architecture is proposed based on the imperfect
array. Unlike existing methods, the input of SDOA-
Net is the raw sampled signals and the output is a
vector, which can be easily used to estimate the spatial
spectrum. Convolution layers are then used to get the
signals’ features and avoid the complexity of high-
dimension signals. The SDOA-Net output is a vector for
the spectrum estimation and can avoid the problem of
discretizing the spatial domain. Compared to the existing
CNN-based method, the proposed SDOA-Net can be
easily trained and perform the better estimation.
3) A spatial spectrum-based loss function to train the
SDOA-Net is proposed, where Gaussian functions are
used to approximate the spatial spectrum. Inspired by
the atomic norm minimization (ANM)-based DOA es-
timation method, the output of SDOA-Net is used to
formulate the spatial spectrum. Differently from existing
networks for the DOA estimation, we use a special
spectrum-based loss function to measure the error be-
tween the reference spectrum and the estimated one and
to train the network.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The
system mode of practical DOA estimation is formulated in
Section II. The review of the super-resolution DOA estimation
method is given in Section III. Then, the proposed SDOA-Net
for DOA estimation is shown in Section IV. The simulation
results are carried out in Section V, and finally Section VI
concludes the paper.
Notations: Matrices and column vectors are denoted by
upper- and lower-case boldface letters, respectively. The matrix
transpose and the Hermitian transpose are represented by (·)T
and (·)H, respectively. The real and imaginary parts of a


===== PAGE 3 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT
3
Baseband signal processing
RF
RF
RF
RF
Mutual 
coupling 
effect
DOA
Inconsistent 
gains and 
phases
Position 
peturbation
Estimated 
DOA
Nonlinear 
effect
Fig. 1. The system model for the DOA estimation in a practical array.
complex value are denoted by R· and I·, respectively. The
trace of a matrix is denoted by Tr·. The ℓ2 norm is represented
by | · |2.
II. THE SYSTEM MODEL FOR PRACTICAL DOA
ESTIMATION
In this paper, we consider the DOA estimation problem
in a practical system and propose a DL-based estimation
framework. As shown in Fig. 1, we consider K far-field
signals, and the k-th (k = 0, 1, . . . , K −1) signal is expressed
as sk(t) ∈C with the DOA being θk ∈
 −π
2 , π
2

. A linear
array system with N antennas is used to receive the signals
and estimate the DOAs, where the wavelength is denoted as λ.
Taking into account the additive noise wn(t) ∈C, the signal
received at the n-th (n = 0, 1, . . . , N −1) antenna can be
expressed as
rn(t) = g

xn(t) +
X
n′̸=n
Bn,n′xn′(t)

+ wn(t).
(1)
Then, we have
xn(t) =
K−1
X
k=0
sk(t)Anejϕnej2π dn
λ sin θk,
(2)
where taking the 0-th antenna as the reference one, i.e., d0 = 0,
the position of the n-th antenna is dn, and for a uniform linear
array (ULA), the position of the antenna is dn = nλ/2. In
the received signal (1), the following imperfect problems are
considered:
1) The mutual coupling effect: The antennas cannot be
ideally isolated and introduce the mutual coupling ef-
fect among the received signals. The mutual coupling
coefficient between the n-th and n′-th (n ̸= n′) antenna
is Bn,n′ ∈C with |Bn,n′| < 1 in (1);
2) The position perturbations: The antenna positions can-
not be exactly at the desired positions, and will cause
the phase errors of the received signals among antennas
in the steering vector;
3) The inconsistent gains: The radio frequency (RF) chan-
nels usually cannot have exactly the same amplifiers,
and will cause amplitude differences among the received
signals. The channel gain of the n-th antenna is denoted
as An > 0;
4) The inconsistent phases: The difference among the RF
channels will also cause the delay and phases errors of
the received signals, and The channel phase of the n-th
antenna is denoted as ϕn;
5) The nonlinear effect:
The nonlinear effect among RF
channels and analog-to-digital converter (ADC) will
introduce the nonlinear effect and degrade the DOA
estimation performance. We use a non-linear function
g(·) to represent the nonlinear operation in the receiving
channels.
Hence, collect the received signals into a vector
r ≜
r0(t), r1(t), . . . , rN−1(t)T .
(3)
The DOA estimation problem can be formulated as a pa-
rameter estimation problem with the received signal r. Most
existing works consider the methods in the scenario with the
perfect array, where we have the linear function g(·), the
mutual coupling coefficient Bn,n′ is 0, the channel gains are
the same (An = 1 and ϕ0 = 0), and the position dn of the
antenna is known.
However, when an imperfect array is considered, the im-
perfect elements include the mutual coupling effect, the non-
linear effect, the inconsistent phases, the inconsistent gains,
and the position perturbations, etc. In the practical systems,
most existing super-resolution methods cannot outperform the
traditional methods, where the super-resolution methods must
have perfect systems and high SNR. In this paper, we will
focus on a robust super-resolution method for DOA estimation
with imperfect system effects.
III. THE REVIEW OF SUPER-RESOLUTION DOA
ESTIMATION METHODS
A. The Atomic Norm-Based Estimation Methods
In recent years, atomic norm-based methods have been
proposed for line-spectra estimation and achieved better per-
formance by exploiting the sparsity of the spectrum in the
frequency domain. Additionally, the DOA estimation problem
can be easily described as a line-spectral estimation problem,
so atomic norm-based methods have been proposed for the
DOA estimation.
Usually, in the atomic norm-based methods. the ideal ULA
is assumed, and the received signal based on (1) in the n-th
array can be expressed as
rn =
K−1
X
k=0
skej2π nd
λ sin θk + wn(t),
(4)


===== PAGE 4 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT
4
where the distance between adjacent antennas is d = λ
2 . Then,
with the definition of a steering vector
a(θ) ≜
h
1, ej 2πd
λ
sin θ, . . . , 1, ej 2π(N−1)d
λ
sin θ
iT
,
(5)
collect all the received signals into a vector, and we have
r ≜
r0, r1, . . . , rN−1
T
= As + w,
(6)
where we define the steering matrix as
A ≜
a(θ0), a(θ1), . . . , a(θK−1)
,
(7)
the signal vector is defined as
s ≜
s0, s1, . . . , sK−1
T ,
(8)
and the noise vector is
w ≜
w0, w1, . . . , wN−1
T .
(9)
In the ANM-based DOA estimation method, an atomic norm
is defined as
∥x∥A ≜inf
n X
n
αn′ : x =
X
αn′ejϕn′ a(θn′),
ϕn′ ∈[0, 2π), αn′ ≥0
o
,
(10)
which describes a sparse representation of x with the sparse
coefficients being αn′ (n′ = 0, 1, . . . , N ′ −1). Then, with
the received signal r, we denoise the signal with a sparse
reconstruction signal x, which can be expressed as an ANM
expression
min
x
1
2∥r −x∥2
2 + β∥x∥A,
(11)
where the parameter β is used to control the trade-off between
the sparsity and the reconstruction accuracy. This ANM prob-
lem can be solved by introducing a semi-definite programming
(SDP) method, which is
min
B,h
∥r −h∥2
2
s.t
 B
h
hH
1

⪰0
(12)
B is Hermitian matrix
Tr{B} = β2
X
n
Bn,n+n′ = 0, for n′ ̸= 0
and n′ = 1 −N, . . . , N −1.
By solving the SDP problem (12), the sparse reconstruction
signal h can be obtained, and the DOA of the received signal
can be estimated by finding the peak values of the following
polynomial
f(θ) = |aH(θ)h|2.
(13)
The ANM-based DOA estimation method is for the ideal
array with perfect assumptions, but for the practical array,
the ANM-based method must be extended. In [40]–[43], the
atomic norm-based methods are extended for the practical ar-
ray. We can find that the much complex optimization problems
are formulated, and a vector like h denoted as h′ can be
obtained. Then, the DOAs are estimated by the peak values
of the following polynomial
f ′(θ) = |aH(θ)h′|2.
(14)
B. The MUSIC-Based Estimated Methods
In the super-resolution estimation method, the MUSIC-
based methods can perform better by using noise and signal
subspaces. For single-snapshot spectral estimation, ref [44]
proposes a MUSIC-based method. A Hankel matrix is obtained
from the received signal r as
R = Hankel(r)


r0
r1
. . .
rN−L
r1
r2
. . .
rN−L+1
...
...
...
...
rL−1
rL
. . .
rN−1

,
(15)
where the received signal r is reshaped as a matrix R ∈
CL×N−L+1. Then, a singular value decomposition (SVD) is
used as
[U 1, U 2]Λ[V 1, V 2] = SVD{R},
(16)
where U 2 is corresponding to the small singular values and Λ
is a diagonal matrix with the entries from the singular values.
Finally, the spatial spectrum can be estimated as
g(θ) =
1
∥aH(θ)U 2∥2
2
.
(17)
IV. THE PROPOSED DOA ESTIMATION METHOD
From the above sections about the existing DOA estimation
methods, we can find that the DOAs are estimated by searching
the peak values of the spatial spectrum. In this section, we
will propose a DL-based super-resolution method for DOA
estimation, and it is named a super-resolution DOA network,
which contains more information and can be trained faster
than the existing covariance matrix-based methods.
A. The Architecture of SDOA-Net
The SDOA-Net architecture is shown in Fig. 2. First, the
received signal in (1) is rewritten as a vector with real and
imaginary parts
y(t) ≜[RT{r(t)}, IT{r(t)}]T ∈R2N×1,
(18)
where we have the received signal vector
r(t) = [r0(t), r1(t), . . . , rN−1(t)]T ∈CN×1.
(19)
With the batch size being MB, the input signal is
Y ≜[y(0), y(1), . . . , y(MB −1)]T,
(20)
and the size is MB × 2N.
Then, since the SDOA-Net is based on the convolution
network, we use a full connection (FC) as the input layer
with the output dimension being MF MI, where MF denotes
the number of filters in the convolution layers and MI denotes
the extension of the inner dimension. After the input layer, the


===== PAGE 5 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT
5
Reshape
FC output
Input layer (FC)
...
Output layer (FC)
...
...
...
...
Real
part
Imaginary
part
Received signals
Real
part
Imaginary
part
Reshape
1D convolution
(MF filters)
Batch 
normalization
+ReLU
Convolution layers
Convolution 
operations
Reshape
1D convolution
(MF filters)
Batch 
normalization
+ReLU
Convolution layers
Convolution 
operations
Fig. 2. The network architecture of the proposed SDOA-Net.
dimension of the signal is MB × MF MI, and we reshape the
signal as a tensor f1(Y ) with the dimension MB ×MF ×MI,
where f1(·) is an input layer function.
The tensor is passed to the convolution layers and the
number of convolution layers is MC. In each convolution
layer, a one-dimensional (1D) convolution operation is realized
with the kernel size being MF ×MK and the padding operation
is used to keep the size of the convolution output the same as
that of the input. The output of the convolution operation is
MB × MF × MI. Then, the batch normalization is applied to
the convolution output, and the normalization output is denoted
as f3(f2(f1(Y ))). The function f2(·) denotes the convolution
operation and f3(·) is the batch normalization operation.
f3(x) =
x −E{x}
p
Var{x} + ϵ
,
(21)
where E{x} and Var{x} are the mean and variance of x, re-
spectively. ϵ is a value added to the denominator for numerical
stability and can be set as ϵ = 10−5. In each convolution layer,
a ReLU function f4(·) is applied to the output of the batch
normalization and is defined as
f4(x) ≜max(0, x).
(22)
After the convolution layers, an FC layer is used as an output
layer with the input and output sizes being MB ×MIMF and
MB × 2N, respectively. The operation in the output layer is
denoted as f5(·).
Finally, as shown in Fig. 3, we can obtain the output of the
SDOA-Net as
G = f5(f4(f3(f2(f4(. . . f4(. . . f2(f1(Y )) . . . ) . . . ))))),
(23)
where we have
G ≜
g(0), g(1), . . . , g(MB −1)
∈R2N×MB.
(24)
As shown in Fig. 4, the corresponding complex vector
can be obtained from the network output g(m) (m
=
0, 1, . . . , MB −1) as
z(m) ≜g0:N−1(m) + jgN:2N−1(m),
(25)
where g0:N−1(m) denotes a sub-vector of g(m) with the index
from 0 to N −1, and gN:2N−1(m) denotes that from N to
f1
f2
f3
f4
f2
f3
f4
f2
f3
f4
f5
Y
G
 ...
Fig. 3. The flowchart of the functional operations.
...
...
Imaginary
part
Real part
...
Complex vector
The SDOA-Net
 output
Steering 
vector
Spatial
spectrum
g(m)
g0:N-1(m)
gN:2N-1(m)
g0:N-1(m)+jgN:2N-1(m)
a(ζ)
Fig. 4. The flowchart to obtain the spatial spectrum from the network output.


===== PAGE 6 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT
6
2N −1. With the output z of SDOA-Net, the spatial spectrum
can be estimated by
fsp(ζ) = |aH(ζ)z|2,
(26)
where ζ is chosen based on the detection area, such as from
−π/2 to π/2.
The SDOA-Net proposed in this study introduces a novel
approach compared to existing methods. Unlike previous ap-
proaches, our network takes raw sampled data as input and
utilizes convolution layers to extract features from these raw
data. By using the raw data, which contain all the information
of the received signals, we obtain a vector as the network’s
output. This output vector is distinct from the DOA results or
the spatial spectrum used by existing methods. In particular,
the size of the output vector matches the number of antennas in
the array, resulting in a lower dimension compared to networks
that output the spectrum. Consequently, training time can be
significantly reduced. Furthermore, DOAs can be obtained by
finding the peak values of fsp(ζ) in (26), which can avoid
the problem of adopting the determined number of received
signals in networks using DOA values as output.
B. The Training Approach
To train the SDOA-Net, the spatial spectrum fsp(ζ) is
obtained from (26) and the refereed spectrum is given as
follows
fref(ζ) =
K−1
X
k=0
Ake
−
(ζ−θk)2
σ2
G
,
(27)
where we use Gaussian functions to approximate the spatial
spectrum. Ak denotes the spectrum value, and σG is the
standard deviation of the Gaussian function. In this paper, we
set the value of σG as
σG = ¯σG/N.
(28)
An example of the referenced spatial spectrum approximated
by the Gaussian functions is shown in Fig. 5, where we use
16 antennas, ¯σG = 100, and the ground-truth DOAs are −30◦,
10◦, and 20◦. The width of the 3 dB spectrum is about 10.4◦.
With the refereed spectrum, the loss function is defined as
floss(ζ) = 1
Ω∥fref(ζ) −fsp(ζ)∥2
2 ,
(29)
where fref(ζ) ∈RΩ×1 and fsp(ζ) ∈RΩ×1 are vectors with the
ω-th (ω = 0, 1, . . . , Ω−1) entry being fref(ζω) and fsp(ζω),
respectively. We define
ζ ≜
ζ0, . . . , ζΩ−1
T ,
(30)
where Ωis the number of the discretized spatial angles. The
SDOA-Net is trained to minimize the loss function floss(ζ) in
(29) by updating the network coefficients.
For the practical system, the mutual coupling effect, the
nonlinear effect, the inconsistent phases, the inconsistent gains,
and the position perturbations are considered in this paper. The
training procedure is shown in Fig. 6, and the following steps
can be used to train the SDOA-Net:
-50
0
50
Spatial angle (deg)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Amplitude
Approximated spectrum
Ground-truth DOA
Fig. 5. The refereed spatial spectrum approximated by the Gaussian functions.
Perfect array
using all the 
data
Position 
perturbations 
using all the data
Inconsistent 
phases using all 
the data
Inconsistent 
gains using all 
the data
Mutual coupling 
effect using all 
the data
All the imperfect 
effect using all 
the data
Nonlinear 
effect using all 
the data
Start
No
End
Is training 
completed?
Yes
Fig. 6. The training procedure for the SDOA-Net.
1) Perfect array step: The received signals using perfect
array without the imperfect effect are used during the
training procedure;
2) Position perturbation step: The received signals with
position perturbation are used. The position perturbation
is generated by a Gaussian distribution with the mean
being 0 and the standard deviation σper selected by a
uniform distribution σper ∈[0, σmax_per]. The parameter
σmax_per can be specified in the simulation;
3) Inconsistent gains step: The inconsistent gains are
considered in this step. Similarly, the inconsistent gains
are generated by a zero-mean Gaussian distribution with


===== PAGE 7 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT
7
the standard deviation σgain being σgain ∈[0, σmax_gain],
where σmax_gain is specified in the simulation;
4) Inconsistent phases step: The inconsistent phases
are also generated by a zero-mean Gaussian distribu-
tion with the standard deviation σphase being σphase ∈
[0, σmax_phase], where σmax_phase is specified in the simu-
lation;
5) Mutual coupling effect step: The mutual coupling
effect is described by a matrix B with complex entries,
and the diagonal entries are all ones. The entry at the
n-th row and the n′-th column is denoted as
Bn,n′ = |Bn,n′|ejψn,n′ ,
(31)
and |Bn,n′| is determined by a uniform distribution
|Bn,n′| ∈[0, σ|n−n′|
mc
] with n ̸= n′. The phase ψn,n′
follows a uniform distribution ψn,n′ ∈[0, 2π). The
parameter σmc is specified in the simulation;
6) Nonlinear effect step: The nonlinear effect is described
by a nonlinear function
fnonlinear(x) = tanh(xσnonlinear),
(32)
where σnonlinear is specified in the simulation to control
the nonlinear effect. The tanh(·) function is used as a
nonlinear function. Usually, we can also use other types
of the activation function, such as ReLU, leaky ReLU,
sigmoid, etc., and the choice of activation function will
not have a big impact on the performance of the DOA
estimation;
7) All the imperfect effect step: We consider all the
imperfect effects to train the network.
The network is trained to the next step after all the data is
used in the current step. For example, when we use all the
data in the inconsistent phases step, we go to the next step
of the mutual coupling effect. After training SDOA-Net in
sequence according to the above steps, we start over from the
first step to train the network again until the maximum number
of training procedures.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, the DOA estimation performance of the pro-
posed SDOA-Net using a practical array is evaluated through
simulation. The simulations are conducted on a computer with
MATLAB R2020b, equipped with an Intel Core i5 @ 2.9 GHz
processor and 8 GB LPDDR3 @ 2133 MHz. The SDOA-Net
source code, including the training codes and a pre-trained net-
work, is available at https://github.com/chenpengseu/SDOA-
Net.git. SDOA-Net is based on PyTorch 1.4 and Python 3.7.
The simulation parameters are given in Table I. We use
N = 16 antennas to receive the signals and the SDOA-Net
to estimate the DOA, where the number of signals is K = 3.
Moreover, the hyperparameters for the imperfect array are also
given in Table I. The estimation performance is measured by
the root mean square error (RMSE)
RMSE =
r
1
NsimK
ˆθ −θ

2
2,
(33)
TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
The standard deviation in the Gaussian function
¯σG = 100
The batch size
64
The number of convolution layers
6
The number of filters in the convolution layer
2
The kernel size in the convolution layer
3
The learning rate
5 × 10−4
The number of antennas N
16
The number of targets K
3
The distance between adjacent antennas
0.5λ
The maximum standard deviation of
position perturbation σmax_per
0.15
The maximum standard deviation of
inconsistent gain σmax_gain
0.5
The maximum standard deviation of
inconsistent phase σmax_phase
0.2
The maximum mutual coupling effect σmc
0.06
The nonlinear effect σnonlinear
1.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
SNR (dB)
1
1.5
2
2.5
The RMSE of DOA estimation (deg)
Layers = 2
Layers = 4
Layers = 6
Layers = 8
Layers = 10
Layers = 12
Layers = 14
Fig. 7. The DOA estimation performance with different numbers of layers.
where Nsim is the number of simulations, ˆθ is the estimated
DOA vector, and θ is the ground-truth DOA vector.
First, the proposed SDOA-Net contains convolution layers
and each convolution layer has convolution, batch normal-
ization, and ReLU active function operations. In SDOA-Net,
some important hyperparameters must be considered for a
better DOA estimation. The first hyperparameter is the number
of 1D convolution layers. In Fig. 7, we show the performance
of the DOA estimation with different numbers of convolution
layers. As shown in this figure, when the number of convolu-
tions is 6, a better estimation performance is achieved, so we
use 6 convolution layers in the following simulations.
Then, we compare the DOA estimation performance among
the networks using different numbers MF of filters that are
used in the convolution layers. As shown in Fig. 8, for


===== PAGE 8 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT
8
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
SNR (dB)
1
1.5
2
2.5
The RMSE of DOA estimation (deg)
Filters = 2
Filters = 4
Filters = 6
Filters = 8
Filters = 10
Fig. 8. The DOA estimation performance with different numbers of filters.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
SNR (dB)
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
The RMSE of DOA estimation (deg)
Standard deviation = 10
Standard deviation = 20
Standard deviation = 40
Standard deviation = 60
Standard deviation = 80
Standard deviation = 100
Standard deviation = 120
Standard deviation = 140
Fig. 9. The DOA estimation performance with different standard deviations
¯σG.
the consideration of both the estimation performance and
the network complexity, better performance is achieved with
MF = 2, so we will use 2 filters in the following simulations.
Note that selecting optimal values for individual parameters
does not necessarily ensure that the network configuration
will attain the global optimum. Nonetheless, by comparing
the network’s performance across various parameter settings,
we are able to assess the influence of distinct parameters on
the network’s overall performance. This analysis facilitates
informed the selection of network parameters.
In the procedure of training the SDOA-Net, the referred
spatial spectrum is used to measure the loss function, where
we use the Gaussian functions to approximate the spatial
spectrum. Hence, the standard deviation ¯σG in the Gaussian
-50
0
50
Spatial angle (deg)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
The spatial spectrum
Proposed method
MUSIC method
ANM method
FFT method
OMP method
Ground-truth DOA
Fig. 10. The spatial spectrum compared with the existing methods.
function is important to approximating the spatial spectrum.
We show the performance of DOA estimation with different
standard deviations ¯σG in Fig. 9. When the standard deviation
¯σG is 100, a better performance of DOA estimation is achieved,
so we will use ¯σG = 100 in the following simulation.
Next, based on the above SDOA-Net parameters, the es-
timated spatial spectrum is shown in Fig. 10 for the DOA
estimation and is also compared with the following existing
methods:
• MUSIC method [44]: The conventional MUSIC method
estimates the covariance matrix based on multiple snap-
shots and employs eigenvalue decomposition to estimate
DOA. To make a fair comparison, we adopt the snapshot-
based MUSIC algorithm proposed in [44] that utilizes a
Hankel data matrix and Vandermonde decomposition in
the MUSIC method.
• ANM method [45]–[47]: ANM-based methods have
been introduced for DOA estimation, which can take ad-
vantage of the sparsity of the targets in the spatial domain.
In contrast to current CS-based methods, which involve
discretizing the spatial domain into grids and using a
dictionary matrix for sparse reconstruction, such as those
proposed in [48]–[50], ANM methods estimate DOA in
the continuous domain. This approach can overcome the
off-grid problem caused by discrete methods.
• FFT method: The FFT method is widely used in practi-
cal systems with low computational complexity. However,
the resolution of the FFT method is unsatisfactory but
robust to the imperfect array;
• OMP method [51]–[53]: The orthogonal matching pur-
suit (OMP) method is a CS-based method using the
discretized spatial angles and has relatively low compu-
tational complexity. Hence, it has been widely used in
sparse reconstruction problems.
As shown in Fig. 10, the spatial spectrum estimated by the


===== PAGE 9 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT
9
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
SNR (dB)
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
The RMSE of DOA estimation (deg)
Proposed method
ANM method
FFT method
MUSIC method
OMP method
Fig. 11. The DOA estimation performance with different SNRs.
proposed SDOA-Net performs better than the MUSIC, ANM,
FFT and OMP methods. Additionally, the proposed method
is based on the convolution network and has low computa-
tional complexity than the ANM and MUSIC methods. The
computational complexity of the proposed network is O(N 2),
and the computational complexities of ANM and MUSIC are
O((N + 1)6.5) and O(N 3), respectively. Therefore, the pro-
posed SDOA-Net is efficient in the DOA estimation problem.
Next, the performance of the DOA estimation under differ-
ent SNRs is shown in Fig. 11, where the SNR ranges from
0 dB to 30 dB. This figure shows that the proposed method
achieves a better estimation performance in the scenario with
an imperfect array than the method using the ANM, FFT,
MUSIC, and OMP methods. For the SNR being 10 dB, the
RMSE of the proposed SDOA-Net is about 0.70◦and that of
the ANM method is about 1.15◦, so the RMSE improvement
is about 39.13%. Furthermore, when the SNR is 7.5 dB, the
RMSE of the proposed SDOA-Net method is the same as
that of the ANM method with the SNR being 15 dB, so the
improvement in the SNR is about 7.5 dB.
We use an imperfect factor to measure the imperfect effect,
defined as ξ. With the imperfect factor ξ, the imperfect
parameters for position perturbation, inconsistent gain, incon-
sistent phase, mutual coupling effect and non-linear effect
will be ξσmax_per, ξσmax_gain, ξσmax_phase, ξσmc, and ξσnonlinear,
respectively. For example, as presented in Table I, the maxi-
mum standard deviation of position perturbation is denoted as
σmax_per = 0.15.Given an imperfection factor of ξ = 0.5, the
standard deviation of position perturbation for the simulations
is adjusted to ξσmax_per = 0.5 × 0.15 = 0.075. To evaluate
the DOA estimation performance across various scenarios, we
vary the imperfection factor from 0.1 to 1.0.
Fig. 12 illustrates the performance of DOA estimation when
considering various imperfect factors. The SDOA-Net method,
proposed in this study, outperforms the compared methods
in terms of accuracy of estimation. Moreover, the proposed
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
The imperfect factor
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
The RMSE of DOA estimation (deg)
Proposed method
FFT method
OMP method
ANM method
MUSIC method
Fig. 12. The DOA estimation performance with different imperfect factors.
-50
0
50
Spatial angle (deg)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
The spatial spectrum
Proposed method
Deep frequency network
FFT method
OMP method
Ground-truth DOA
Fig. 13. The spatial spectrum compared with the existing deep learning-based
method.
method demonstrates superior performance in scenarios with
higher imperfect factors, indicating its robustness against the
negative impact of imperfections.
In addition, ref. [54] also introduces a DL-based approach to
estimate the DOA, known as the deep frequency network. This
method utilizes the network output as the spectrum. Fig. 13
illustrates the spatial spectrum of both the proposed SDOA-Net
and the deep frequency network. It can be observed that the
estimated spectrum from the deep frequency network is less
smooth compared to that of the proposed SDOA-Net, since the
output of the deep frequency network is the spatial spectrum.
Consequently, SDOA-Net demonstrates superior DOA estima-
tion performance compared to the deep frequency network.
Fig. 14 illustrates the performance of DOA estimation at
varying SNRs, ranging from 0 dB to 30 dB. Both the SDOA-


===== PAGE 10 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT
10
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
SNR (dB)
100
101
The RMSE of DOA estimation (deg)
Proposed method
FFT method
OMP method
Deep frequency network
Fig. 14. The DOA estimation performance compared with the existing deep
learning-based method.
Net and the deep frequency network employ the same training
data set. From the DOA estimation performance, it can be
found that the deep frequency network does not achieve a
better DOA estimation performance, mainly because of the
following two reasons: 1) The spatial spectrum obtained by
the deep frequency network is not smooth enough, which is
easy to incorrectly select the peak value of the spatial spectrum
and fail to obtain the DOA information; 2) The deep frequency
network has high accuracy for the DOA estimation of the
perfect array [54], but its efficacy considerably diminishes for
the imperfect array due to the lack of specific optimization
for robustness. Consequently, when compared to traditional
model-based approaches such as FFT and OMP methods, the
deep frequency network exhibits inferior performance. The
performance of the proposed SDOA-Net surpasses that of ex-
isting methods such as the FFT method, the OMP method, and
the deep frequency network. Since the proposed SDOA-Net is
tailored for imperfect array and generates a smoother output
spatial spectrum, which simplifies the process of accurately
identifying the spectral peaks during the peak-search stage.
Consequently, this enhancement enables the proposed SDOA-
Net to achieve the improved DOA estimation performance for
the imperfect array.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
The problem of estimating the DOA has been studied in
the context of an imperfect array. A system model has been
developed to account for various factors such as antenna
position perturbations, inconsistent gains and phases, mutual
coupling effect, and nonlinear effect. To address this problem,
a novel method, called SDOA-Net, has been introduced.
Unlike existing approaches, SDOA-Net takes raw sampled
signals as input and produces a vector that can be used to
estimate the spatial spectrum. By utilizing convolution layers,
SDOA-Net achieves faster convergence in training compared
to other deep learning-based methods. The simulation results
demonstrate the advantages of SDOA-Net in DOA estimation
using a practical array. For an SNR of 10 dB, the RMSE
in DOA estimation achieved through the proposed method
exhibits a 39.13% improvement over the performance of the
ANM method. In the future, further research will focus on
the theoretical analysis of SDOA-Net’s performance in DOA
estimation.
REFERENCES
[1] Q. Tian and R. Cai, “A low-complexity DOA estimation algorithm for
distributed source localization,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72,
pp. 1–4, 2023.
[2] J. A. Zhang, F. Liu, C. Masouros, R. W. Heath, Z. Feng, L. Zheng, and
A. Petropulu, “An overview of signal processing techniques for joint
communication and radar sensing,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Signal Processing, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1295–1315, Nov. 2021.
[3] M. Pan, P. Liu, S. Liu, W. Qi, Y. Huang, X. You, X. Jia, and X. Li,
“Efficient joint DOA and TOA estimation for indoor positioning with
5G picocell base stations,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, pp.
1–19, 2022.
[4] C. Xu, B. Clerckx, S. Chen, Y. Mao, and J. Zhang, “Rate-splitting
multiple access for multi-antenna joint radar and communications,” IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1332–
1347, Nov. 2021.
[5] L. Zhu, S. Qiu, and Y. Han, “Combined constrained adaptive sum and
difference beamforming in monopulse angle estimation,” IEEE Antennas
Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 2314–2318, Dec. 2018.
[6] J. Lin, W. Fang, Y. Wang, and J. Chen, “FSF MUSIC for joint DOA and
frequency estimation and its performance analysis,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 4529–4542, Dec. 2006.
[7] F. Yan, M. Jin, and X. Qiao, “Low-complexity DOA estimation based on
compressed MUSIC and its performance analysis,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 1915–1930, Apr. 2013.
[8] X. Zhang, L. Xu, L. Xu, and D. Xu, “Direction of departure (DOD)
and direction of arrival (DOA) estimation in MIMO radar with reduced-
dimension MUSIC,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 1161–
1163, Dec. 2010.
[9] S. Kim, D. Oh, and J. Lee, “Joint DFT-ESPRIT estimation for TOA and
DOA in vehicle FMCW radars,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett.,
vol. 14, pp. 1710–1713, 2015.
[10] J. Lin, X. Ma, S. Yan, and C. Hao, “Time-frequency multi-invariance
ESPRIT for DOA estimation,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett.,
vol. 15, pp. 770–773, 2016.
[11] X. Zhang, X. Gao, and D. Xu, “Multi-invariance ESPRIT-based blind
DOA estimation for MC-CDMA with an antenna array,” IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol., vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 4686–4690, Oct. 2009.
[12] F.-M. Han and X.-D. Zhang, “An ESPRIT-like algorithm for coherent
DOA estimation,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 4, pp.
443–446, 2005.
[13] F. Chen, D. Yang, and S. Mo, “A DOA estimation algorithm based on
eigenvalues ranking problem,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp.
1–15, 2023.
[14] Q. Guo, Z. Xin, T. Zhou, and S. Xu, “Off-grid space alternating sparse
bayesian learning,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–10, 2023.
[15] L. Wan, Y. Sun, L. Sun, Z. Ning, and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “Deep
learning based autonomous vehicle super resolution DOA estimation
for safety driving,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp.
4301–4315, Jul. 2021.
[16] P. Chen, Z. Cao, Z. Chen, and X. Wang, “Off-grid DOA estimation
using sparse Bayesian learning in MIMO radar with unknown mutual
coupling,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 208–220,
Jan. 2019.
[17] S. Jiang, N. Fu, Z. Wei, Z. Lian, L. Qiao, and X. Peng, “Compressed
sampling for spectrum measurement and DOA estimation with array
cooperative MWC,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–14,
2023.
[18] J. Dai and H. C. So, “Real-valued sparse Bayesian learning for DOA
estimation with arbitrary linear arrays,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 69, pp. 4977–4990, Aug. 2021.
[19] Y. Mao, Q. Guo, J. Ding, F. Liu, and Y. Yu, “Marginal likelihood
maximization based fast array manifold matrix learning for direction
of arrival estimation,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 69, pp. 5512–
5522, 2021.


===== PAGE 11 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT
11
[20] J. Wan, C. Wang, P. Shen, H. Fu, and J. Zhu, “Robust and fast super-
resolution SAR tomography of forests based on covariance vector sparse
Bayesian learning,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 1–5,
2022.
[21] L. Wang, L. Zhao, S. Rahardja, and G. Bi, “Alternative to extended
block sparse Bayesian learning and its relation to pattern-coupled sparse
Bayesian learning,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 66, no. 10, pp.
2759–2771, May 2018.
[22] M. M. Hyder and K. Mahata, “Direction-of-arrival estimation using a
mixed ℓ2,0 norm approximation,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 58,
no. 9, pp. 4646–4655, 2010.
[23] R. Lu, M. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Chen, and A. Zhang, “Direction-of-arrival
estimation via coarray with model errors,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp.
56 514–56 525, 2018.
[24] N. Ruan, F. Wen, L. Ai, and K. Xie, “A PARAFAC decomposition
algorithm for DOA estimation in colocated MIMO radar with imperfect
waveforms,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 14 680–14 688, 2019.
[25] S. Liu, Z. Zhang, and Y. Guo, “2-D DOA estimation with imperfect
L-shaped array using active calibration,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25,
no. 4, pp. 1178–1182, Apr. 2021.
[26] L. Wan, Y. Sun, L. Sun, Z. Ning, and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “Deep
learning based autonomous vehicle super resolution DOA estimation
for safety driving,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp.
4301–4315, 2021.
[27] H. Huang, J. Yang, H. Huang, Y. Song, and G. Gui, “Deep learning for
super-resolution channel estimation and DOA estimation based massive
MIMO system,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 8549–
8560, 2018.
[28] H. Lee, J. Cho, M. Kim, and H. Park, “DNN-based feature enhancement
using DOA-constrained ICA for robust speech recognition,” IEEE Signal
Process. Lett., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 1091–1095, 2016.
[29] T. N. T. Nguyen, W.-S. Gan, R. Ranjan, and D. L. Jones, “Robust
source counting and DOA estimation using spatial pseudo-spectrum
and convolutional neural network,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 28, pp. 2626–2637, 2020.
[30] Y. Yuan, S. Wu, M. Wu, and N. Yuan, “Unsupervised learning strategy
for direction-of-arrival estimation network,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett.,
vol. 28, pp. 1450–1454, 2021.
[31] L. Wu, Z. Liu, and Z. Huang, “Deep convolution network for direction of
arrival estimation with sparse prior,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 26,
no. 11, pp. 1688–1692, Nov. 2019.
[32] G. Papageorgiou, M. Sellathurai, and Y. Eldar, “Deep networks for
direction-of-arrival estimation in low SNR,” IEEE Trans. Signal Pro-
cess., vol. 69, pp. 3714–3729, 2021.
[33] R. Akter, V. Doan, T. Huynh-The, and D. Kim, “RFDOA-Net: An
efficient ConvNet for RF-based DOA estimation in UAV surveillance
systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 11, pp. 12 209–12 214,
Nov. 2021.
[34] L. Wu, Z.-M. Liu, and Z.-T. Huang, “Deep convolution network for
direction of arrival estimation with sparse prior,” IEEE Signal Process.
Lett., vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 1688–1692, 2019.
[35] A. M. Ahmed, U. S. K. P. M. Thanthrige, A. E. Gamal, and A. Sezgin,
“Deep learning for DOA estimation in MIMO radar systems via emu-
lation of large antenna arrays,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 5, pp.
1559–1563, 2021.
[36] G. K. Papageorgiou, M. Sellathurai, and Y. C. Eldar, “Deep networks
for direction-of-arrival estimation in low SNR,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 69, pp. 3714–3729, 2021.
[37] A. M. Elbir, “DeepMUSIC: Multiple signal classification via deep
learning,” IEEE Sensors Lett., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 1–4, 2020.
[38] Z. Liu, C. Zhang, and P. Yu, “Direction-of-arrival estimation based on
deep neural networks with robustness to array imperfections,” IEEE
Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 7315–7327, 2018.
[39] S. Chakrabarty and E. A. P. Habets, “Multi-speaker DOA estimation
using deep convolutional networks trained with noise signals,” IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 8–
21, Mar. 2019.
[40] P. Chen, Z. Chen, Z. Cao, and X. Wang, “A new atomic norm for DOA
estimation with gain-phase errors,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 68,
pp. 4293–4306, 2020.
[41] Q. Wang, X. Wang, T. Dou, H. Chen, and X. Wu, “Gridless super-
resolution doa estimation with unknown mutual coupling,” in ICASSP
2019 - 2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP).
Brighton, United Kingdom: IEEE, May
2019, pp. 4210–4214.
[42] A. Govinda Raj and J. H. McClellan, “Single snapshot super-resolution
DOA estimation for arbitrary array geometries,” IEEE Signal Process.
Lett., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 119–123, Jan. 2019.
[43] Q. Gong, S. Ren, S. Zhong, and W. Wang, “DOA estimation using sparse
array with gain-phase error based on a novel atomic norm,” Digital
Signal Processing, vol. 120, p. 103266, Jan. 2022.
[44] W. Liao and A. Fannjiang, “MUSIC for single-snapshot spectral es-
timation: Stability and super-resolution,” Applied and Computational
Harmonic Analysis, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 33–67, Jan. 2016.
[45] A. Govinda Raj and J. H. McClellan, “Single snapshot super-resolution
DOA estimation for arbitrary array geometries,” IEEE Signal Process.
Lett., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 119–123, Jan. 2019.
[46] Z. Wei, W. Wang, F. Dong, and Q. Liu, “Gridless one-bit direction-
of-arrival estimation via atomic norm denoising,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,
vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 2177–2181, Oct. 2020.
[47] Z. Yang and L. Xie, “Enhancing sparsity and resolution via reweighted
atomic norm minimization,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 64, no. 4,
pp. 995–1006, Feb. 2016.
[48] Z. Yang, C. Zhang, J. Deng, and W. Lu, “Orthonormal expansion ℓ1-
minimization algorithms for compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 6285–6290, Dec. 2011.
[49] Z. Tan, P. Yang, and A. Nehorai, “Joint Sparse Recovery Method for
Compressed Sensing With Structured Dictionary Mismatches,” IEEE
Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62, no. 19, pp. 4997–5008, Oct. 2014.
[50] G. Yu and G. Sapiro, “Statistical compressed sensing of Gaussian
mixture models,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 5842–
5858, Dec. 2011.
[51] K. Aghababaiyan, V. Shah-Mansouri, and B. Maham, “High-precision
OMP-based direction of arrival estimation scheme for hybrid non-
uniform array,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 354–357, Feb.
2020.
[52] M. Lin, M. Xu, X. Wan, H. Liu, Z. Wu, J. Liu, B. Deng, D. Guan, and
S. Zha, “Single sensor to estimate DOA with programmable metasur-
face,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 10 187–10 197,
Jun. 2021.
[53] Y. Chen, W. Wang, Z. Wang, and B. Xia, “A source counting method us-
ing acoustic vector sensor based on sparse modeling of DOA histogram,”
IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 69–73, Jan. 2019.
[54] G. Izacard, S. Mohan, and C. Fernandez-Granda, “Data-driven estima-
tion of sinusoid frequencies,” in NeurIPS, 2019.
Peng Chen (Seinor Member, IEEE) received the
B.E. and Ph.D. degrees from the School of In-
formation Science and Engineering, Southeast Uni-
versity, Nanjing, China, in 2011 and 2017 respec-
tively. From March 2015 to April 2016, he was
a Visiting Scholar with the Department of Electri-
cal Engineering, Columbia University, New York,
NY, USA. He is currently an Associate Professor
with the State Key Laboratory of Millimeter Waves,
Southeast University. His research interests include
target localization, super-resolution reconstruction,
and array signal processing. He is a Jiangsu Province Outstanding Young
Scientist. He has served as an IEEE ICCC Session Chair, and won the Best
Presentation Award in 2022 (IEEE ICCC). He was invited as a keynote speaker
at the IEEE ICET in 2022. He was recognized as an exemplary reviewer for
IEEE WCL in 2021, and won the Best Paper Award at IEEE ICCCCEE in
2017.


===== PAGE 12 =====
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT
12
Zhimin Chen (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in information and communication engineer-
ing from the School of Information Science and
Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
in 2015. Since 2015, she is currently an associate
professor at Shanghai Dianji University, Shanghai,
China. From 2021, she is also a Visiting Scholar
in the Department of Electronic and Information
Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic Univer-
sity, Hong Kong. Her research interests include
array signal processing, vehicle communications and
millimeter-wave communications.
Liang Liu (S’14-M’15) received the B.Eng. degree
from the Tianjin University, China, in 2010, and
the Ph.D. degree from the National University of
Singapore in 2014. He is currently an Assistant
Professor in the Department of Electronic and Infor-
mation Engineering at the Hong Kong Polytechnic
University. Before that, he was a Research Fellow
in the Department of Electrical and Computer En-
gineering at National University of Singapore from
2017 to 2018, and a Postdoctoral Fellow in the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
at the University of Toronto from 2015 to 2017. His research interests include
the next generation cellular technologies and machine-type communications
for the Internet of Things. He was the recipient of the 2021 IEEE Signal Pro-
cessing Society Best Paper Award, the 2017 IEEE Signal Processing Society
Young Author Best Paper Award, and the Best Paper Award from the 2011
International Conference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing.
He was recognized by Clarivate Analytics as a Highly Cited Researcher in
2018. He is an editor for IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
and was a leading guest editor for IEEE Wireless Communications special
issue on “Massive Machine-Type Communications for IoT”.
Yun Chen (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
degree from UESTC in 2000 and the Ph.D. degree
from Fudan University in 2007.
In 2007, she joined Fudan University, where she
has been with the faculty since March 2008. She
has been with Fudan University as an Associate
Professor of the State Key Laboratory of ASIC and
System. She has published more than 60 articles
in such international journals and conferences as
IEEE ASSCC, IEEE Transactions ON CAS, IEEE
Transactions ON Communication, IEEE ASP-DAC,
IEEE ICASSP, ICC, and ISCAS. She applied for more than 20 patents.
Her research fields include base-band processing technologies for wireless
communication and ultra-low power FEC IC design. She also serves as a Chair
Secretary of the Shanghai Chapter of IEEE SSCS, a TPC Member of ASSCC,
a Co-Chair of the Circuit System Division, Chinese Institute of Electronics,
and a member of the Steering Committee of SIPS and the ASICON technical
committee.
Xianbin Wang (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in electrical and computer engineering from
National University of Singapore, in 2001. He is
a Professor and Tier-I Canada Research Chair at
Western University, Canada. Prior to joining Western
University, he was with Communications Research
Centre (CRC) Canada as a Research Scientist/Senior
Research Scientist between July 2002 and December
2007. From January 2001 to July 2002, he was a
System Designer with STMicroelectronics, where
he was responsible for the system design of DSL
and Gigabit Ethernet chipsets. His current research interests include 5G
technologies, Internet of Things, communications security, machine learning
and locationing technologies. Dr. Wang has over 300 peer-reviewed journal
and conference papers, in addition to 26 granted and pending patents and
several standard contributions. Dr. Wang is a Fellow of Canadian Academy
of Engineering and an IEEE Distinguished Lecturer. He has received many
awards and recognitions, including Canada Research Chair, CRC Presidents
Excellence Award, Canadian Federal Government Public Service Award,
Ontario Early Researcher Award and five IEEE Best Paper Awards. He
currently serves as an Editor/Associate Editor for IEEE Transactions on
Communications, IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, and IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology and he was also an Associate Editor for IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications between 2007 and 2011, and IEEE
Wireless Communications Letters between 2011 and 2016. Dr. Wang was
involved in many IEEE conferences including GLOBECOM, ICC, VTC,
PIMRC, WCNC, and CWIT, in different roles such as symposium chair,
tutorial instructor, track chair, session chair and TPC co-chair.
