

===== PAGE 1 =====
UNSUPERVISED ADAPTATION OF AI DOA ESTIMATORS VIA DOWNSTREAM TRACKING
Shaul Konstantino, Lei Li, Nir Shlezinger, and Davide Dardari
ABSTRACT
Accurate direction of arrival (DoA) estimation plays a central role
in a broad range of applications. While artificial intelligence (AI)
has recently emerged as a powerful tool for DoA estimation in
challenging scenarios, these AI methods are sensitive to distri-
bution shifts caused by calibration drifts, hardware variations, or
changing propagation conditions, and adaptation requires labeled
data that may be impractical to obtain during deployment. In
this work, we introduce a framework for unsupervised adaptation
of AI-based DoA estimators by adopting a holistic system-level
perspective. Our key insight is that localization algorithms
are rarely applied in isolation, but are instead followed by
downstream tracking mechanisms such as Kalman filtering. We
exploit the statistical information encoded in the innovations of
such tracking algorithms to construct unsupervised performance
measures that guide online adaptation of the DoA estimator. We
develop a dedicated learning algorithm for continual unsuper-
vised adaptation, and demonstrate through numerical studies
that our approach enables reliable and flexible AI-aided DoA
estimation in time-varying environments.
Index Terms— Unsupervised learning, DoA estimation.
1. INTRODUCTION
Accurate direction of arrival (DoA) estimation is a fundamental
building block in a wide range of modern technologies, including
wireless communications, radar, and navigation. Traditionally,
this task has been carried out using classic model-based algo-
rithms, such as MUSIC [1] and related subspace methods [2],
which exploit the statistical relationship between transmitted
sources and the impinging signals. These methods, however, typ-
ically rely on simplified assumptions, including fully-calibrated
arrays, non-coherent sources, and idealized noise statistics.
The emergence of artificial intelligence (AI) has spurred sig-
nificant research into data-driven algorithms for DoA estimation.
Deep learning models have been shown to enable accurate local-
ization in challenging scenarios where classical methods struggle,
such as in the presence of calibration errors, limited snapshots,
and low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [3]. Existing methods can
be broadly categorized into two families. The first employs deep
S. Konstantino and N. Shlezinger are with the ECE School, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Be’er-Sheva, Israel (e-mails: shaulkon@post.bgu.ac.il;
nirshl@bgu.ac.il). L. Li and D. Dardari are with the Department of Electrical,
Electronic, and Information Engineering “Guglielmo Marconi” - DEI-CNIT,
University of Bologna, Cesena, Italy (e-mails:
lei.li2@studio.unibo.it;
davide.dardari@unibo.it).
neural networks (DNNs) such as multilayer perceptrons [4–7],
convolutionalneuralnetworks(CNNs)[8–11], andattentionmod-
els [12,13] to estimate the DoAs from array measurements or re-
lated features. The latter follows model-based deep learning [14],
integrating DNNs into classical estimators rather than replacing
them, thereby combining the interpretability of array processing
with the flexibility of learning. Examples include DNNs that
augment MUSIC-type methods by providing enhanced spec-
tra [15, 16], or DNNs that generate covariance surrogates for
subspace methods to operate under violations of standard assump-
tions, as in SubspaceNet [17] and related algorithms [18–21].
Despite their success, AI-aided DoA estimators face a crit-
ical limitation: they typically assume that the deployment data
distribution closely matches the one used during training. In
practice, this assumption rarely holds, as the underlying statistical
models vary over time and across devices. In principle, such
distribution shifts could be handled through online and continual
learning of the AI models [22]. However, existing methods
are trained in a supervised manner, requiring access to labeled
pairs of received signals and their corresponding DoAs. While
such ground-truth data can be obtained offline via simulations or
measurements, it is unlikely to be provided in real time for online
adaptation. Attempts to relax the reliance on labels have led to
limited unsupervised formulations. The work [23] proposed to
reconstruct the covariance from estimated DoAs, which is valid
under simplified statistical assumptions, while [24] translated
MUSIC spectra into surrogate unsupervised metrics used for
model-based calibration rather than DNN training.
In this work, we propose a framework for unsupervised
adaptation of AI-aided DoA estimation methods by adopting a
holistic system-level viewpoint. While providing an unsupervised
assessment of DoA recovery in isolation is inherently chal-
lenging, we recognize that such algorithms are rarely deployed
standalone. Instead, they are typically integrated within larger
systems that incorporate downstream tracking mechanisms, such
as Kalman filtering. We exploit this observation by leveraging
the statistical information embedded in the innovation features
of downstream tracking to guide online, unsupervised adaptation
of DNN-based DoA estimators. Building on this principle, we
design a dedicated learning algorithm that continuously monitors
these innovation features to adjust the DoA estimator to variations
in the underlying statistical model. Our numerical study demon-
strates that the proposed approach enables reliable and flexible
AI-aided DoA estimation under time-varying calibration drifts.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
presents the system model. Our method is derived in Section 3 and
evaluated in Section 4. Section 5 provides concluding remarks.


===== PAGE 2 =====
2. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
2.1. System Model
Signal Model: The considered system utilizes a uniform linear
array (ULA) comprising N antenna elements to continuously
recover the DoAs of M sources. We assume a block-wise op-
eration, where in each block of index i, the system collects T
multidimensional snapshots xi(t) ∈CN×1, for t = 1, 2, . . . , T,
corresponding to M narrowband far-field sources si(t) ∈CM×1
with DoAs θi = [θi,1, . . . , θi,M] ∈[−π
2 , π
2 ]M. DoA estimators
aim to recover θi from Xi = [xi(1), . . . , xi(T)] ∈CN×T .
Under standard far-field propagation, the received Xi obeys
Xi = Ai(θi)[si(1), . . . , si(T)] + V i,
(1)
where V i ∈CN×T represents additive noise with distribution
function PV i, while Ai(θ) = [ai(θ1), . . . , ai(θM)] ∈CN×M,
is the steering matrix. For ideal half-wavelength spaced ULAs,
it holds that ai(θ) = [1, e−jπ sin(θ), . . . , e−jπ(N−1) sin(θ)]⊤.
Temporal Variations: The DoAs are assumed to remain
static within each block, but vary between blocks due to, e.g.,
source movement. These variations are modeled as a state evolu-
tion model, i.e., there exists a function f(·) such that
θi+1 = f(θi) + wi,
(2)
where wi is an i.i.d. driving noise with covariance Q.
AI-Aided Localization: We focus on DoA estimation car-
ried out using an AI-aided algorithm, either fully DNN-based,
e.g., [8], or a DNN-augmented model-based algorithm, e.g., [17].
Such AI-aided DoA estimators map Xi into an estimate of the
DoAs ˆθi = gψ(Xi), where ψ is the trainable DNN parameters.
2.2. Problem Formulation
Our goal is to design an algorithm that enables AI-aided DoA
estimators to continuously provide accurate estimates of θi
over multiple blocks. Specifically, over a horizon of I blocks,
performance is measured in the mean-squared periodic er-
ror (MSPE) [25]. We aim to handle the following challenges:
C1 Nonstationarity: The statistical model (1) (e.g., the statistics
of the noise PV i can change, and the array response ai(θ))
can change between blocks, for instance, due to calibration
drifts. Unlike the variations in the DoAs, which are modeled
via (2), we do not assume any prior knowledge of the nature
of the variations in statistical model.
C2 Unlabeled Data: The DoA estimator gψ(·) is pre-trained
offline using labeled data (array measurements and DoAs)
from the initial block (i = 1). However, once deployed, it
has no access to ground-truth DoAs at any block i > 1.
3. UNSUPERVISED ONLINE LEARNING
Adapting AI-aided DoA estimators in deployment faces a tension
between challenges C1 and C2. Handling C1 with undisclosed
Fig. 1:
System architecture illustrating the signal model,
AI-aided DoA estimation, downstream tracking, and the
adaptation mechanism triggered by innovation statistics.
changes in the current signal statistics requires ground-truth data
to refine trainable parameters ψ. Yet this need clashes with C2,
which rules out ground-truth DoAs during operation.
Our approach resolves this tension by leveraging the temporal
evolution modeled in (2). We thus focus on the expected oper-
ation in which the DoA estimator is not a standalone component
but is followed by a tracking algorithm that exploits the Marko-
vian state evolution, which is monitored as a measure for online
adaptation. We next describe the overall system (Subsection 3.1)
and the resulting online learning algorithm (Subsection 3.2)
followed by a discussion (Subsection 3.3).
3.1. System Overview
The overall pipeline (Fig. 1) consists of four modules:
1. AI-aidedlocalization: Foreachblocki, theAI-aidedestimator
maps the array measurements to a DoA estimate, ˆθi = gψ(Xi).
2. Downstream tracking: A Bayesian tracker (e.g., Kalman-
type) exploits the temporal model in (2) to update the instan-
taneous estimate ˆθi into the system prediction ˜θi and to filter
consecutive estimates across blocks.
3. Innovation monitoring: Our main measure for adaptation
is based on monitoring the tracking innovation term:
yi ≜˜θi −gψ(Xi) .
(3)
The innovation yi in (3) is computed and summarized over
sliding windows to form statistics used for drift detection.
4. Adaptation: When the monitored statistics indicate mismatch,
an unsupervised loss drives gradient-based updates of ψ over
a short adaptation horizon, after which online inference resumes
with the updated model (see Subsection 3.2).
Monitoring {yi} over multiple blocks yields an unsupervised
signal that: i) detects distribution shifts caused by calibration
drifts or environmental changes (C1); and ii) guides adaptation
without labels (C2). In this way, the AI-aided DoA estimator is
updated based solely on consistency between its outputs and the
downstream tracking, obviating the need for ground-truth DoAs.
3.2. Unsupervised Learning Algorithm
We continuously assess the agreement between the data-driven
AI predictions and the temporally consistent tracking using


===== PAGE 3 =====
statistics of the innovation sequence {yi}. To that aim, over a
sliding window of I blocks, we compute
σ2
y(i) = 1
I
i
X
j=i−I+1
∥yj∥2.
(4)
The empirical variance σ2
y(i) captures short-term consistency
between the AI estimator and the tracker. Adaptation is triggered
when the innovation statistics depart from nominal values, e.g.,
if σ2
y(i) > τσ with thresholds τσ. When {yi} is modeled as
zero-mean i.i.d. Gaussian, this implements a form of Chi-Squared
test for which the threshold can be computed analytically. How-
ever, in our numerical examples we tune τσ manually to avoid
imposing a distribution on (3).
When it is triggered that adaptation is required, we update
the parameters of the AI-aided estimator ψ using an innova-
tion–based loss we term mean-squared innovation error (MSIE).
This loss, defined over a window Wi of I blocks indexed
i −I + 1, . . . i, is given by
LWi(ψ) = 1
I
i
X
j=i−I+1
˜θj −gψ(Xj)
2.
(5)
Parameters are updated by gradient descent (GD) on LWi(ψ).
The complete online procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1.
While the formulation in Algorithm 1 focuses on a single time
block i for simplicity, when adaptation is triggered (i.e., σ2
y(i) >
τσ), we repeat the GD steps also over the subsequent W windows,
after which online operation continues with the updated ψ.
Algorithm 1: Unsupervised Adaptation at block i
Init :Window size I; threshold τσ;
step-size η; GD steps S;
Input :Observations {Xi}, current DNN weights ψ
1 Compute ˆθi = gψ(Xi);
2 Obtain tracking prediction ˜θi from downstream filter;
3 Compute tracking innovation yi via (3);
4 Update σ2
y(i) via (4);
5 if σ2
y(i) > τσ then
6
Form the window Wi = {(Xj, ˜θj)}i
j=i−I+1;
7
for s = 1 to S do
8
Compute LWi(ψ) using (5);
9
Update ψ ←ψ −η∇ψLWi(ψ);
10 return ψ
3.3. Discussion
The proposed method is particularly suitable for tackling the
problem as formulated in Section 2. By adopting a system-level
viewpoint and integrating downstream tracking, we resolve the
inherent tension between nonstationarity (C1) and the lack of
online labeled data (C2). Our design combines unsupervised
adaptation with a mechanism that triggers adaptation as a form
of concept drift detector [26,27]. Our detector does not monitor
changes in the impinging signals, but instead focuses on vari-
ations in the outputs of the AI-aided estimator . In this way, it
leverages the ability observed for AI-aided DoA estimators to
generalize to some forms of distribution changes [3], ensuring
that adaptation is only activated when needed, thus avoiding
unnecessary updates in response to distributional changes that
do not degrade performance substantially.
Algorithm 1 facilitates adaptive and autonomous operation
at the cost of excessive complexity compared to using static
pretrained systems. In particular, as its test statistic is based on
a simple empirical squared deviation mean (5), its complexity
is dominated by training procedure conducted once adaptation is
triggered. The latter involves taking W ·I ·S gradients, i.e., back-
propagation steps through gψ(·). Its excessive burden can thus
be balanced by setting the hyperparameters W, I, S, as well as by
making adaptation less frequent by increasing τσ. In our experi-
mental study we tune these hyperparameters manually. However,
a potential follow-up direction is to employ downstream features
not only for constructing unsupervised training losses, but also
for guiding the adaptation of hyperparameters such as step sizes
and window lengths in an online fashion. Another promising
extension is to consider alternative test statistics for triggering
adaptation. These extensions are left for future research.
4. NUMERICAL STUDY
4.1. Experimental Setup
In this section we numerically evaluate Algorithm 1 for online
adaptation of AI-aided DoA estimators1. We consider a ULA
comprising N = 9 antenna elements operating at 5 GHz with
DoAs uniformly generated from [−π
2 , π
2 ]. We evaluate two
snapshot regimes: T = 200 and T = 20, representing high
and limited observation scenarios. The impinging signals are
narrowband and non-coherent originating from M = 3 sources.
Three sources move over 100 blocks following with an evolu-
tion model(2) given byθi+1 = θi+[3, −3, 2]⊙sin(ω0·t)+wi,
where ω0 = [−0.15, 0.25, 0.15] and wi is i.i.d. Gaussian noise
with standard deviation 0.03. Distribution shifts are introduced
at a randomly selected block to simulate calibration drifts en-
countered in deployment. These shifts model two types of
array imperfections: (i) Distance miscalibration, representing
deviations from nominal half-wavelength spacing, modeled as
uniform perturbations δn ∼U(−η, η) with η ∈{0.3, 0.9, 1.2}
that affect the phase response; and (ii) Geometric noise, rep-
resenting additional steering vector perturbations, modeled as
additive complex Gaussian noise ϵn,θ with variance 0.9. The
combined effect produces a perturbed steering matrix:
[a(θ)]n = e−j2π (dn+δn) sin(θ)
λ
+ ϵn,θ,
(6)
1The source code and all hyperparameters are available online at
https://github.com/UliKonstantin/SubspaceNet


===== PAGE 4 =====
Pre-trained
Online supervised
Algorithm 1
SNR
[dB]
T =20
T =200
T =20
T =200
T =20
T =200
0
11.3◦
11.15◦
5.47◦
5.38◦
7.90◦
7.51◦
5
12.37◦
12.31◦
5.65◦
5.57◦
7.95◦
8.80◦
10
17.44◦
16.06◦
4.54◦
4.37◦
6.51◦
6.47◦
Table 1: Time-averaged RMSPE for different SNRs, after
distribution change due to calibration shift
Fig. 2: Performance in RMSPE (upper plot) and MSIE (lower
plot) versus block index, T = 200 snapshots per block
where the distance drift δn disturbs the steering matrix through
phase shifts, and the geometric noise ϵn,θ is additive to the
steering matrix itself. As we model shifts in the array response,
we keep the noise V i in (1) stationary, and set its distribution to
be Gaussian.
As our AI-aided DoA estimator, we use the SubspaceNet
algorithm of [17], whose DNN ψ is based on a convolutional
autoencoder. SubspaceNet is pre-trained on 4096 labeled sam-
ples from an ideal ULA. The downstream tracking algorithm is
a Kalman filter with plugged in state evolution noise variance
and observation variance of 0.03. In implementing Algorithm 1,
we consider a sliding window of I = 5 blocks, adaptation period
of 10 windows, and adapt using S = 5 GD steps when triggered.
We also evaluate supervised online learning which requires one
to provide ground-truth DoAs online once the distribution shifts.
4.2. Numerical Results
We first evaluate the time-averaged rmspe over all 300 blocks
of length T = 200 and T = 20 and averaged over 100 Monte
Carlo trials. In Table 1 we compare the results achieved by
tracking the DoA based on the pre-trained static SubspaceNet
to those achieved with our unsupervised Algorithm 1 as well as
with (impractical) online supervised learning. The algorithms
are compared different SNR values, defined here as the inverse
variance of V i. Table 1 demonstrates the online learning model
consistently outperforms the pre-trained baseline across all
SNR conditions. The pre-trained model struggles coping with
distribution shifts, particularly trained at data with higher SNRs.
Fig. 3: Performance in RMSPE (upper plot) and MSIE (lower
plot) versus block index, T = 20 snapshots per block
Accordingly, Algorithm 1 demonstrates substantial gains ranging
from 3.5◦to 14.46◦. and approaches the performance that is
achieved with supervised online training.
We proceed to demonstrating the ability of Algorithm 1 in
rapidly mitigating the effects of distribution shifts by monitoring
performance per block. Specifically, we report both the actual er-
ror of the overall system (i.e., the root MSPE (RMSPE)) and the
unsupervised loss utilized by Algorithm 1, namely, the MSIE (5).
We monitor these figures for a scenario with relatively long blocks
(T = 200) as well as limited (T = 20) snapshot conditions at
varying SNR of [0, 5, 10] dB, with the detailed evolution curves
reported in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively. Observing Figs. 2-3, we
note clear adaptation phases where the online unsupervised model
progressively improves performance, and is only within a minor
gap of the performance achieved with supervised online learning.
The unsupervised MSIE metric effectively tracks supervised RM-
SPE performance, validating that innovation statistics serve as
reliable proxies for estimation quality. Notably, the online adap-
tation presents high tolerance to resource-constrained scenarios
with limited observations. These results validate the effectiveness
of our unsupervised adaptation framework, demonstrating main-
tained accurate DoA estimation under challenging conditions
including low SNR, limited observations, and model miscalibra-
tions, without requiring labeled data during deployment.
5. CONCLUSIONS
We proposed an unsupervised adaptation framework for AI-aided
DoA estimators that leverages downstream tracking innovations
to enable online learning without labeled data. Our approach
successfully handles distribution shifts caused by calibration
drifts and environmental changes while maintaining accurate
estimation performance. Numerical results demonstrate substan-
tial improvements, validating the effectiveness of our method
for robust DoA estimation in time-varying environments.


===== PAGE 5 =====
6. REFERENCES
[1] R. Schmidt, “Multiple emitter location and signal parameter
estimation,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 34, no. 3,
pp. 276–280, 1986.
[2] S. U. Pillai, Array signal processing.
Springer, 2012.
[3] H. Al Kassir, Z. D. Zaharis, P. I. Lazaridis, N. V. Kantartzis,
T. V. Yioultsis, and T. D. Xenos, “A review of the state
of the art and future challenges of deep learning-based
beamforming,” IEEE Access, 2022.
[4] M. Chen, Y. Gong, and X. Mao, “Deep neural network for
estimation of direction of arrival with antenna array,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 140 688–140 698, 2020.
[5] J. Cong, X. Wang, M. Huang, and L. Wan, “Robust DOA es-
timation method for MIMO radar via deep neural networks,”
IEEE Sensors J., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 7498–7507, 2021.
[6] S. Feintuch, J. Tabrikian, I. Bilik, and H. Permuter,
“Neural-network-based DOA estimation in the presence of
non-gaussian interference,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron.
Syst., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 119–132, 2023.
[7] M. Fabiani, D. Dardari, A. D’Amico, and L. Sanguinetti,
“One-shot near-field localization with AI-optimized
hybrid beamformer design,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on
Communications (ICC), 2025.
[8] G. K. Papageorgiou, M. Sellathurai, and Y. C. Eldar, “Deep
networks for direction-of-arrival estimation in low SNR,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 69, pp. 3714–3729, 2021.
[9] L. Wu, Z.-M. Liu, and Z.-T. Huang, “Deep convolution
network for direction of arrival estimation with sparse
prior,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 26, no. 11, pp.
1688–1692, 2019.
[10] H. Lee, Y. Kim, S. Seol, and J. Chung, “Deep learning-
based near-field source localization without a priori
knowledge of the number of sources,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
pp. 55 360–55 368, 2022.
[11] Y. Qin, “Deep networks for direction of arrival estimation
with sparse prior in low SNR,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp.
44 637–44 648, 2023.
[12] X. Lan, H. Zhai, and Y. Wang, “A novel DOA estimation
of closely spaced sources using attention mechanism with
conformal arrays,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 44 010–44 018,
2023.
[13] J. Ji, W. Mao, F. Xi, and S. Chen, “TransMUSIC: A
transformer-aided subspace method for DOA estimation
with low-resolution ADCs,” in Proc, IEEE ICASSP, 2024.
[14] N. Shlezinger and Y. C. Eldar, “Model-based deep learning,”
Foundations and Trends® in Signal Processing, vol. 17,
no. 4, pp. 291–416, 2023.
[15] D. T. Hoang and K. Lee, “Deep learning-aided coherent
direction-of-arrival estimation with the FTMR algorithm,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 70, pp. 1118–1130, 2022.
[16] A. M. Elbir, “DeepMUSIC: Multiple signal classification
via deep learning,” IEEE Sensors Letters, vol. 4, no. 4, pp.
1–4, 2020.
[17] D. H. Shmuel et al., “SubspaceNet: Deep learning-aided
subspace methods for DoA estimation,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 74, no. 3, pp. 4962–4976, 2025.
[18] J. P. Merkofer et al., “Data-driven DoA estimation via deep
augmented MUSIC algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 2771–2785, 2024.
[19] X. Xu and Q. Huang, “MD-DOA: A model-based deep
learning DOA estimation architecture,” IEEE Sensors J.,
vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 20 240–20 253, 2024.
[20] A. Gast, L. L. Magoarou, and N. Shlezinger, “Near
field localization via AI-aided subspace methods,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.00599, 2025.
[21] R. Zohar, S. Ginzach, and N. Shlezinger, “Remote DoA
estimation via subspace-oriented deep-learning-aided
vector quantization,” in Proc. IEEE SPAWC, 2025.
[22] T. Raviv, S. Park, O. Simeone, Y. C. Eldar, and
N. Shlezinger, “Adaptive and flexible model-based AI
for deep receivers in dynamic channels,” IEEE Wireless
Commun., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 163–169, 2024.
[23] F. Weißer, M. Baur, and W. Utschick, “Unsupervised
parameter estimation using model-based decoder,” in Proc.
IEEE SPAWC, 2023, pp. 571–575.
[24] B. Chatelier, J. M. Mateos-Ramos, V. Corlay, C. H¨ager,
M. Crussiere, H. Wymeersch, and L. L. Magoarou,
“Physically parameterized differentiable MUSIC for
DoA estimation with uncalibrated arrays,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.15144, 2024.
[25] T. Routtenberg and J. Tabrikian, “Bayesian parameter
estimation using periodic cost functions,” IEEE Trans.
Signal Process., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 1229–1240, 2011.
[26] J. Lu, A. Liu, F. Dong, F. Gu, J. Gama, and G. Zhang,
“Learning under concept drift: A review,” IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 2346–2363, 2018.
[27] N. Uzlaner, T. Raviv, N. Shlezinger, and K. Todros,
“Asynchronous online adaptation via modular drift
detection for deep receivers,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 4454–4468, 2025.
