

===== PAGE 1 =====
SubspaceNet: Deep Learning-Aided Subspace
Methods for DoA Estimation
Dor H. Shmuel, Julian P. Merkofer, Guy Revach, Ruud J. G. van Sloun, and Nir Shlezinger
Abstract—Direction of arrival (DoA) estimation is a fundamen-
tal task in array processing. A popular family of DoA estimation
algorithms are subspace methods, which operate by dividing the
measurements into distinct signal and noise subspaces. Subspace
methods, such as Multiple Signal Classification (MUSIC) and
Root-MUSIC, rely on several restrictive assumptions, including
narrowband non-coherent sources and fully calibrated arrays,
and their performance is considerably degraded when these do
not hold. In this work we propose SubspaceNet; a data-driven
DoA estimator which learns how to divide the observations into
distinguishable subspaces. This is achieved by utilizing a dedi-
cated deep neural network to learn the empirical autocorrelation
of the input, by training it as part of the Root-MUSIC method,
leveraging the inherent differentiability of this specific DoA
estimator, while removing the need to provide a ground-truth
decomposable autocorrelation matrix. Once trained, the resulting
SubspaceNet serves as a universal surrogate covariance estimator
that can be applied in combination with any subspace-based
DoA estimation method, allowing its successful application in
challenging setups. SubspaceNet is shown to enable various DoA
estimation algorithms to cope with coherent sources, wideband
signals, low SNR, array mismatches, and limited snapshots,
while preserving the interpretability and the suitability of classic
subspace methods.
I. INTRODUCTION
Direction of arrival (DoA) estimation is a common array
processing task, which deals with localizing emitting sources
by determining the incidence angles of impinging waves [2].
A leading and well-trusted family of DoA estimators is
based on subspace methods, including the celebrated Multiple
Signal Classification (MUSIC) algorithm [3], Root-MUSIC
(Root-MUSIC) [4], and Estimation of Signal Parameters via
Rotational Invariance Techniques (ESPRIT) [5]. When given
sufficient signal snapshots, these techniques estimate multiple
DoAs with low complexity by separating the impinging wave
into distinguishable signal and noise subspaces, achieving
angular resolution that is not limited by the array geometry [2].
The ability to separate an impinging wave into signal and
noise subspaces, which is the core of subspace methods, relies
on the orthogonality between the noise components and the
array response. For this to hold, several key assumptions
underlying subspace methods must be satisfied: (i) the signals
need to be narrowband; (ii) the sources should be non-
coherent; (iii) the array has to be fully calibrated; (iv)
Parts of this work were presented in the 2023 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP) as the paper [1].
D. H. Shmuel and N. Shlezinger are with the School of ECE, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel (e-mail: shmueldo@post.bgu.ac.il;
nirshl@bgu.ac.il). J. P. Merkofer and R. J. G. van Sloun are with the
EE Dpt., Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands (e-mail:
{j.p.merkofer; r.j.g.v.sloun}@tue.nl). G. Revach is with the D-ITET, ETH
Z¨urich, Switzerland, (email: grevach@ethz.ch).
sufficient snapshots are needed such that one can faithfully
to estimate the input covariance; and (v) the statistical model
underlying the estimation procedure has to be fully known.
These requirements are often violated in practical settings,
that frequently involve multiband signals, coherent sources
(due to, e.g., multipath), miscalibrations in the array, limited
snapshots, and mismatched models. Different pre-processing
methods such as the spatial smoothing (SPS) and forward-
backward (FB), have been proposed to tackle some of these
limitations individually, e.g., [6], [7]. These schemes average
the power spectrum of the received signals over a number
of adjacent sensor positions, thereby increasing the effective
aperture, while resulting in a trade-off between resolution
and variance reduction. Specifically, larger averaging windows
result in better variance reduction but poorer resolution, while
smaller windows result in better resolution but poorer variance
reduction. Hence, they tend to degrade the overall estimation
performance and resolution, while constraining the number of
recoverable sources.
Over the last decade, deep learning has emerged as a leading
tool for data-driven inference. Deep neural networks (DNNs),
which learn their mapping from data without relying on
system modelling, have demonstrated unprecedented success
in areas involving complex data such as computer vision [8].
Accordingly, DNN-based approaches have recently been con-
sidered for DoA estimation [9]–[31], as also surveyed in
[32]. Specifically, in [9]–[18] different DNN architectures such
as multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) [9], [10], convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [11]–[16], attention models [17], and
ResNet variants [18], were trained to learn the mapping from
the observations or their empirical covariance directly into
DoAs. While DNNs can be trained to estimate DoAs without
imposing specific requirements on the signal model, they typ-
ically require highly parameterized architectures trained with
massive data sets, limiting their applicability on hardware-
limited devices where DoA estimation is often carried out.
Furthermore, black-box DNNs lack the interpretability and
flexibility of model-based algorithms, and often give rise to
generalization issues.
An alternative approach uses DNNs alongside model-based
DoA estimation, as a form of model-based deep learning [33],
[34]. For instance, the work [19] reduced the complexity
of maximum likelihood DoA recovery by using a DNN to
limit the angular search space, thus still relying on accurate
statistical modelling of the signals.
The works [25]–[27]
trained DNN architectures to produce clean coavriance ma-
trices that can be used for downstream subspace-based DoA
estimation, while assuming access to a data set comprised of
1
arXiv:2306.02271v2  [eess.SP]  11 Jul 2024


===== PAGE 2 =====
ideal covariances such that the DNN can be trained separately.
The work [20] used narrowband signal modelling to train
CNN-based DoA estimators in an unsupervised manner. In
the context of subspace methods, [21] trained an autoencoder
to reconstruct a clean input from a corrupted and then pass
it to MLP classifiers to reconstruct a MUSIC spectrum, while
[22]–[24] used DNNs to directly produce a (discretized) spatial
spectrum. However, these DNN-aided estimators [21]–[24]
were not trained to provide DoAs, and share the limitations
of model-based subspace methods.
Several recent works [28]–[31] proposed architectures that
jointly learns to compute the empirical covariance along with
the processing of the resulting MUSIC spectrum. The resulting
estimators were capable of coping with, e.g., coherent and
wideband sources. However, this augmentation comes at the
cost of compromising on the interpretability of subspace
methods, as the DoAs were recovered from the empirical
covariance using an additional DNN, learning a deep model
where one cannot extract meaningful interpretation from its
MUSIC spectrum. This motivates designing DNN-aided DoA
estimators that cope with the limitations of model-based
subspace methods, e.g., coherent sources and few snapshots,
while preserving their interpretability and suitability.
Here, we propose SubspaceNet, which leverages data to
implement subspace-based DoA estimation. SubspaceNet is
designed to cope with coherent sources, broadband signals,
few snapshots, and calibration mismatches. This is achieved
by identifying that these limitations of model-based subspace
methods are encapsulated in their reliance on the empirical
covariance of the received signals. SubspaceNet thus preserves
the operation of subpsace methods while using a dedicated
trainable autoencoder which learns from data how to map
the empirical auto-correlation of the observed signal into a
surrogate covariance that is universally useful for subspace-
based DoA recovery, i.e., that is decomposable into signal and
noise subspaces.
In order to train an autoencoder that produces subspace-
compliant covariance estimates, we exploit the inherent dif-
ferentiability of Root-MUSIC to convert the algorithm into a
trainable discriminative model [35]. By doing so, the trained
DNN computes meaningful subspace representations lead-
ing to accurate DoA estimates, without having to provide
ground-truth decomposable covariances. SubspaceNet thus
learns to compute meaningful subspace representations that,
once trained, can be combined with different subspace DoA
estimators, including MUSIC, Root-MUSIC, and ESPRIT. We
empirically show that SubspaceNet outperforms model-based
subspace methods for both coherent and non-coherent sources,
and that it successfully operates with broadband signals,
calibration mismatches, low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and
few snapshots. We also demonstrate the SubspaceNet creates
a clear and significant distinction between the noise and the
signal subspaces, which facilitates its diagnosis and identifying
of the number of sources.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
formulates the setup and recalls subspace methods. Section III
presents SubspaceNet, which is numerically evaluated in Sec-
tion IV. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
Fig. 1: DoA estimation system illustration.
Throughout this paper, we use boldface-uppercase for matri-
ces, e.g., X, boldface-lowercase for vectors, e.g., x. We denote
the jth entry of vector x and the (i, j)th entry of matrix X by
[x]j and [X]i,j, respectively. We use (·)H, (·)T , ∥·∥, and E [·]
for the hermitian transpose, transpose, ℓ2 norm, and stochastic
expectation, respectively.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we present the system model, beginning
with received signal model in Subsection II-A. We then briefly
review subspace-based DoA estimation in Subsection II-B, and
formulate the considered problem in Subsection II-C.
A. DoA Estimation Signal Model
We consider a receiver equipped with a uniform linear
array (ULA) composed of N half-wavelength spaced antenna
elements. At each discrete time instance t (out of a horizon of
T snapshots, i.e., t ∈{1, . . . , T}), the receiver gathers multidi-
mensional observations, denoted x(t) = [x1(t), . . . , xN(t)] ∈
CN. These signals originate from M sources, represented as
s(t) = [s1(t), . . . , sM(t)] ∈CM, and the DoAs of these
sources are denoted in vector form as θ = [θ1, . . . , θM]. The
system is illustrated in Fig. 1. DoA estimation is the recovery
of θ from the observations obtained over T snapshots.
When the transmitted signals are narrowband and in the far-
field of the array, the received signal over T snapshots, denoted
X = [x(1), . . . , x(T)] ∈CN×T is typically modelled as
X = A(θ)S + V .
(1)
In (1), S = [s(1), . . . , s(T)] ∈CM×T is the sources signals
matrix; V ∈CN×T is the noise matrix comprised of i.i.d.
entries with variance σ2
V ; and A(θ) = [a(θ1), . . . , a(θM)] ∈
CN×M is the steering matrix, where
a(θ) ≜[1, e−jπ sin(θ), ..., e−jπ(N−1) sin(θ)].
(2)
When the sources are zero-mean and stationary, the covari-
ance of the observations is obtained from (1) as
RX = E

XXH
= A(θ)RSAH(θ) + σ2
V IN,
(3)
where RS denotes the covariance of S.
B. Subspace-Based DoA Estimation
Subspace methods are a family of DoA estimation algo-
rithms that rely on the ability to decompose the observations
covariance matrix in (3) into orthogonal signal and noise
subspaces. They are based on the following assumptions:
2


===== PAGE 3 =====
AS1 The sources are narrowband, such that (1) holds.
AS2 The sources are non-coherent, namely, the covariance
matrix RS in (3) is of full rank.
AS3 The array is calibrated, such that the steering vectors in
(2) are known and accurately match the array.
AS4 The number of snapshots T is sufficiently large, and
the SNR is sufficiently high, such that one can reliably
estimate RX in (3) empirically as
ˆRX = 1
T XXH.
(4)
Under assumptions AS1-AS3, subspace methods decom-
pose the covariance matrix RX in (3), which can be suffi-
ciently estimated under AS4, into orthogonal subspaces. To
see this, we write the eigenvalue decomposition (EVD) of RX
as
RX = UΛU H,
(5)
where Λ is the diagonal eigenvalues matrix while the unitary
matrix U = [u1, . . . , uN] is their corresponding eigenvectors.
The resulting eigenvectors U span an observation space that
can be divided into two orthogonal subspaces: the signal
subspace US and the noise subspace UN [3], i.e.,
U = [US|UN],
where
US⊥UN.
(6)
In (6), US contains M eigenvectors, each corresponding to a
specific directional impinging source [36], and is spanned by
the columns of the steering matrix A(θ); the (N −M) × N
matrix UN, comprised of the eigenvectors corresponding to
the N −M least dominant eigenvalues of RX (which equal
σ2
V ), represents the noise subspace.
The representation (6) implies that A(θ)⊥UN, leading to
aH(θi)UNU H
Na(θi) =
U H
Na(θi)
2 = 0,
(7)
for all i ∈1, . . . , M. Equation (7) forms the basis of subspace
methods, which use it to identify the DoAs, as reviewed next.
1) MUSIC: Arguably the most common subspace-based
DoA estimator is MUSIC [3]. Here, (7) is used to construct
a spectrum representation by taking the inverse projection of
the steering vectors on the noise subspace. In particular, the
noise subspace matrix and the number of sources are estimated
from the EVD of the empirical covariance (4) as ˆ
M and ˆUN,
respectively. The resulting MUSIC spectrum is given by
PMUSIC(θ) =
1
 ˆU
H
Na(θ)
2 .
(8)
The DoAs are then recovered by identifying the peaks of the
constructed spectrum PMUSIC(θ), i.e., the MUSIC spectrum
provides an interpretable visual representation of the DoAs.
2) Root-MUSIC: An alternative approach to recover the
DoAs from the estimated
ˆUN seeks the roots of (7). In
particular, Root-MUSIC formulates the Hermitian matrix F =
ˆUN ˆU H
N using its diagonal sum coefficients fn, defined as
fn =
N−1−n
X
i=0
[F ]i,n+i,
n ≥0,
(9)
where for n < 0, fn = f ∗
|n|. Substituting (9) into (7), the left
hand side of (7) can be expressed as a polynomial equation in
a complex-valued argument z of order 2N −2, given by
D(z) =
N−1
X
i=0
N−1
X
j=0
[a(θ)]∗
i [F ]ij[a(θ)]j
=
N−1
X
i=0
N−1
X
j=0
[F ]ijzi−j =
N−1
X
n=−(N−1)
fnzn,
(10)
where z = e−jπ sin(θ). Root-MUSIC identifies the DoAs from
the roots of the polynomial (10). The roots map is viewed as
the Root-MUSIC spectrum. Since (10) has 2N −2 > M roots
(divided into symmetric pairs), while the roots corresponding
to DoAs should have unit magnitude, the
ˆ
M pairs of roots
which are the closest to the unit circle are matched as the
ˆ
M sources DoAs [4]. Similarly to MUSIC, the Root-MUSIC
spectrum provides a meaningful visualization of the DoAs.
3) ESPRIT: The popular ESPRIT subspace method sepa-
rates the array into two overlapping sub-arrays, where it ex-
ploits the rotational invariance of the covariance matrix eigen-
structure to simplify DoA estimation [5]. The steering matrices
of the subarrays are related by A2(θ) = A1(θ)E, where E is
a diagonal matrix with entries [E]m,m = e−jπ sin(θm). Since
A(θ) spans the signal subspace, the relation between the signal
subspaces of the sub-arrays, which we denote by US1 and US2
for A1(θ) and A2(θ), respectively, can be expressed as
US2 = US1H,
(11)
for some matrix H. Since the eigenvalues of H are equal
to the diagonal elements of E, by solving (11), i.e., ex-
tracting H, one can recover the DoAs from these eigen-
values. Consequently, ESPRIT estimates the DoA vector as
ˆθ = sin−1(∠eig{H}/π), where eig{H} is the vector rep-
resentation of the eigenvalues of H, and ∠(·) is the angle
operator.
C. Problem Formulation
Subspace methods reliably estimate DoAs with an angular
resolution that is not limited by the physical array, and they
typically provide an interpretable visualization of the DoAs
along with uncertainty measures. However, their reliance on
Assumptions AS1-AS4 can be a limiting factor in various
practical scenarios, which often involve broadband signals,
coherent sources, miscalibrations, limited snapshots, and low
SNR. Our goal is to design a method which enables subspace
methods to operate also when AS1-AS4 do not hold.
In particular, we consider the recovery of θ from the
observations matrix X. While the number of sources M is not
assumed to be a-priori known, we limit our attention to settings
where M is smaller than the number of antenna elements N.
Similarly, the number of snapshots T is not known during
system design, though it is lower bounded by some Tmin
(which can be as small as a single snapshot).
To alleviate reliance on AS1-AS4, we consider a data-aided
setting, where one has access to a data set comprised of J
pairs of observations and their corresponding DoAs, denoted
D =
n
X(j), θ(j)oJ
j=1 .
(12)
3


===== PAGE 4 =====
This data can be obtained from real-world sources or from
synthetic data that closely resembles the signals that are
expected to be detected. Different realizations can contain
different numbers of sources M and different number of
snapshots T, i.e., the dimensionality of θ(j) and the number
of columns of X(j) can vary with the sample index j.
III. SUBSPACENET
In this section we present the proposed SubspaceNet. We
begin by discussing the high-level rationale of the algorithm
and its architecture in Subsections III-A-III-B, respectively.
Then, we present how SubspaceNet is trained and applied
during inference in Subsections III-C-III-D, respectively, and
provide a discussion in Subsection III-E.
A. High-Level Rationale
The reason that Assumptions AS1-AS4 are critical for
subspace methods follows from their role in the derivation
of the orthogonality equality in (7). When these assumptions
do not hold, one cannot reliably obtain an estimate of the
input covariance that admits a decomposition into orthogonal
subspaces corresponding to the signals and the noise. Based
on the understanding that the sensitivity of subspace meth-
ods is encapsulated in the empirical covariance computation,
we propose SubspaceNet. SubspaceNet augments subspace
methods with deep learning as a form of model-based deep
learning [33], [34], tackling the aforementioned challenges by
providing a surrogate covariance matrix that can be divided
into orthogonal signal and noise subspaces. To that aim, we
employ a dedicated DNN that learns from data to produce the
desired covariance. The architecture of the DNN is detailed in
Subsection III-B. This surrogate covariance can then be used
by different subspace methods, preserving their operation and
interpretability, as discussed in Subsection III-D.
Since there is no ’ground truth’ surrogate covariance, the
DNN cannot be trained by comparing its output to a reference
label, as commonly done in supervised learning. Instead, we
evaluate the covariance produced by the DNN based on its
usefulness for subspace-based DoA estimation. Consequently,
the training loss is computed by comparing the DoAs available
in (12) to the recovered DoAs at the output of the subspace
DoA estimator employing the DNN, thus converting the DoA
estimation algorithm into a discriminative model [35] that is
trainable end-to-end. Since DNN training is based on first-
order methods, the DoA estimator that processes the learned
covariance during training has to be differentiable, i.e., one
should be able to compute the gradient of the estimated DoAs
with respect to the estimated covariance. Unlike MUSIC,
whose mapping is based on non-differentiable peak-finding,
Root-MUSIC is inherently differentiable, and is thus employed
for training SubspaceNet, as discussed in Subsection III-C.
The overall high-level design is presented in Fig. 2.
B. Architecture
The trainable architecture employed by SubspaceNet is
designed to be able to map the input signal X into an estimate
of the covariance, denoted ˆR, regardless of the number of
snapshots T. This is done in three stages: extracting features
from X that are informative for the surrogate covariance
estimation task; processing these features using a DNN-based
autoencoder; and post-processing the DNN outputs to obtain
an estimated covariance. We next elaborate on these stages.
1) Feature Extraction: Our design of the features used for
computing the surrogate covariance draws inspiration from
focusing techniques [37]. These approaches aim to convert
broadband DoA recovery setups into surrogate narrowband
ones by estimating the covariance as a linear combination
of the input multivariate power spectral density. Since the
power spectral density of a stationary signal is obtained as
the Fourier transform of its auto-correlation function [38], we
use the empirical auto-correlation of x(t) as our input features.
In particular, we fix a maximal number of lags τmax > 0,
which is not larger than the minimal number of snapshots
Tmin. Then, for each τ ∈{0. . . . , τmax}, we compute the
empirical auto-correlation of X as
ˆRX[τ] =
1
T −τ
T −τ
X
t=1
x(t)xH(t + τ).
(13)
The extracted features, processed by the DNN detailed next,
are thus an N ×N ×(τmax +1) tensor, i.e., its dimensionality
does not depend on T. Consequently, this both provides the
DNN with features that are considered to be informative for
obtaining a useful surrogate covariance matrix, while allowing
the DNN to be invariant of the number of snapshots T.
2) DNN Autoencoder: We utilize a DNN architecture in-
spired by denoising autoencoders to process { ˆRX[τ]}τmax
τ=0 , as
illustrated in Fig. 3. Autoencoders are deep learning architec-
tures that are used for selecting relevant features from noisy
data and mapping them into high-dimensional representations
[39, Ch. 14]. The encoder part of the DNN consists of three
CNN layers gradually increasing filter size. Its goal is to map
the input into a lower dimensional latent representation that
preserves only the meaningful information for the task, thus
filtering out unnecessary information and noise. The decoder,
which is comprised of a decreasing filter size deconvolutional
neural network (DCNN) layers, aims to recover successive
information details from the latent features as it progresses
through its layers, producing a 2N × N matrix which is post-
processed into the surrogate covariance.
We use CNN layers with 2 × 2 kernels. This small kernel
size allows to capture local phase correlations between neigh-
boring sensors over the auto-correlation input, and potentially
improve robustness to noise. The latter follows since the SNR
across the spectrum is not constant, and thus the filters can
detect local phase structures from the high SNR spectral
regions to compensate for the lack of information from the
low SNR regions. Unlike the conventional usage of CNN
autoencoders in, e.g., computer vision, we do not employ
pooling layers to avoid discarding useful spatial information.
Instead of using common rectified linear unit activations
ReLU(z) = max(0, z), we utilize anti-rectifier activations.
This ensures that both positive and negative values are propa-
gated, making it more suitable for sensory data containing both
positive and negative values [40]. The anti-rectifier activation
is expressed as the concatenation of both the positive and the
negative part of the input. Specifically, for an Nz × 1 input
4


===== PAGE 5 =====
Feature
Extraction
DNN
AutoEncoder
Post
Processing
Root-
MUSIC
Backpropagation
(a) SubspaceNet training scheme
MUSIC
ESPRIT
MVDR
Root-
MUSIC
Feature
Extraction
DNN
AutoEncoder
Post
Processing
MUSIC
ESPRIT
MVDR
Root-
MUSIC
(b) SubspaceNet inference scheme
Fig. 2: High level illustration of SubspaceNet
AReLU
CNN
16 x 2N-1 x N-1
32 x 2N-2 x N-2
64 x 2N-3 x N-3
32 x 2N-2 x N-2
16 x 2N-1 x N-1
128 x 2N-3 x N-3
1 x 2N x N
DCNN
 x 2N x N
2N x N
Input/Output
Fig. 3: SubspaceNet autoencoder architecture
vector z = [z1, . . . zNz]T , the activation outputs a 2Nz × 1
vector given by:
AReLU(z) = AReLU
[z1, . . . zNz]T 
=
h
ReLU(z1), . . . ReLU(zNz),
ReLU(−z1), . . . ReLU(−zNz)
iT
.
(14)
3) Post-Processing: The output of the autoencoder is a
2N × N real matrix. To convert it into a surrogate covariance
matrix, which is an N×N complex Hermitian positive definite
matrix, we first reshape the output into a complex matrix
K ∈CN×N, by treating the first N rows as the real part and
the remaining N rows as the imaginary part. To formulate the
surrogate covariance, K is converted into a Hermitian positive
definite covariance estimate via
ˆR = KKH + ϵIN,
(15)
where ϵ > 0 is a fixed hyperparameter of the architecture.
The trainable parameters of the architecture are the weights
of the autoencoder, denoted ψ. We thus write the overall
mapping as ˆR(X; ψ), encompassing the feature extraction,
DNN processing, and output reshaping stages.
C. Training
The training procedure uses the dataset D (12) to tune the
parameters ψ such that the surrogate covariance ˆR(X; ψ) is
useful for subspace-based DoA recovery, i.e., it can be de-
composed into orthogonal subspaces encapsulating the signals
and the noise. This is achieved by encouraging ˆR(X; ψ) to
be a covariance matrix using which the DoAs recovered by
Root-MUSIC, denoted ˆθ
 ˆR(X; ψ)

, is an accurate estimate
of θ. To describe how this is carried out, we first discuss the
loss measure, after which we explain the training procedure.
1) Loss Measure: The loss function evaluates the quality
of DoA estimation by comparing the DoAs recovered by
Root-MUSIC combined with SubspaceNet. While in principle
one can utilize standard loss measures for regression tasks,
e.g., mean-squared error, when evaluating DoA recovery, one
has to account for the following properties:
P1 DoAs are periodic quantities, i.e., estimating ˆθ+2π is the
same as ˆθ. Thus the difference between an angle and its
estimate does not necessarily correspond to actual error.
P2 DoA estimation is invariant to the order of the predicted
DoAs, e.g., estimating ˆθ = [θ1, θ2]T is equivalent to
outputting ˆθ = [θ2, θ1]T .
P3 The number of signals ˆ
M is also estimated, and may thus
differ from the true M, i.e., the cardinality of the output
may not be equal to that of the ground-truth DoAs.
To account for P1, we employ the root mean squared pe-
riodic error (RMSPE) loss [41], which evaluates the element-
wise error over the periodic range. We extend this measure
to be permutation invariant by P2, by modifying the RMSPE
loss to compare all possible combinations of predicted DoAs
with the ground truth labels. To cope with P3, we treat cases
where ˆ
M < M by setting the last M −ˆ
M DoAs recovered
om ˆθ to be zero when evaluating the loss.
The resulting loss function is used to evaluate SubspaceNet
when applied with Root-MUSIC to input X originating from
5


===== PAGE 6 =====
DoAs θ while accounting for P1-P3. It is given by
l(X, θ; ψ) = min
P ∈P
 1
M
modπ

θ −P ˆθ
 ˆR(X; ψ)

2 1
2
,
where modπ denotes the modulo operation with respect to the
angle range of interest, i.e., [−π/2, π/2], and P is the set of
all M × M permutation matrices, i.e., binary matrices where
each row and column contains a single non-zero entry. The
loss evaluated over a dataset D is computed as
LD(ψ) =
1
|D|
X
(X(j),θ(j))∈D
l(X(j), θ(j); ψ),
(16)
2) Training Procedure: The selection of Root-MUSIC as
our model-based estimator for training SubspaceNet, is at-
tributed to the differentiability of its mapping. Specifically,
the DoA estimates are obtained from the roots of the poly-
nomial equation (10), which can be expressed as an implicit
polynomial function. Implicit differentiation makes it possible
to compute the derivative of the polynomial roots, that are
used for the estimated DoAs in Root-MUSIC, with respect to
its coefficients {fn} [42]. These coefficients {fn} are obtained
from the EVD of the estimated covariance matrix, and are thus
differentiable with respect to it, see, e.g., [43].
The above property allows end-to-end optimization of the
DNN parameters of SubspaceNet using first-order methods,
e.g., stochastic gradient descent (SGD) and its variants. In par-
ticularl, automatic differentiation engines, e.g., Autograd [44],
can compute the gradient of the loss (16) with respect to
the trainable parameters ψ by backpropagating through the
Root-MUSIC block in Fig. 2a. The training procedure of
SubspaceNet using SGD is detailed as Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: SubspaceNet Training using SGD
Init: Lags τmax, hyperapameter ϵ, learning rate µ,
number of batches B, epochs number emax.
Input: Training set D
1 Initialize CNN weights ψ;
2 for epoch = 0, 1, . . . , emax do
3
Randomly divide D into B batches {Db}B
b=1;
4
for b = 1, 2, . . . B do
5
for (X(j)
b , θ(j)
b ) ∈Db do
6
Compute ˆR(X(j)
b ; ψ) with SubspaceNet;
7
Use Root-MUSIC to get ˆθ
 ˆR(X(j)
b ; ψ)

;
8
Compute LDb(ψ) using (16);
9
Update weights via ψ ←ψ −µ∇ψLDb(ψ);
10 return ψ
D. Inference
We employ Root-MUSIC during training due to its dif-
ferentiability. However, once trained, SubspaceNet can be
seamlessly incorporated into any classical subspace methods
such as MUSIC and ESPRIT, producing a covariance matrix
which facilitates DoA estimation, as presented in Fig. 2b. The
inference algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 2. This plug-
and-play feature is a significant advantage, as it can notably
enhance the performance of classical methods and enable them
to operate reliably in harsh settings where AS1-AS4 do not
hold, i.e., where the original model-based (MB) algorithms
typically fail. This is thanks to the fact that the learned
surrogate covariance matrix enables the algorithms to operate
as if AS1-AS4 are satisfied, thus they can precisely distinguish
between the noise and signal subspaces, as we demonstrate in
Section IV.
While the presentation of SubspaceNet so far considers
subspace-based DoA estimation, the fact that it learns a covari-
ance that facilitates DoA recovery can also be utilized by other
forms of covariance-based methods. For instance, in our nu-
merical study in Section IV we show that the covariance com-
puted by SubspaceNet can be utilized by minimum variance
distortionless response (MVDR) [45], which processes the
covariance representation without requiring its decomposition
into signal and noise subpace. We demonstrate that combining
MVDR with SubspaceNet enables coping with settings where
the beamformer typically struggles, e.g., coherent sources.
Algorithm 2: SubspaceNet Inference
Init: Trained SubspaceNet parameters ψ,
model-based subspace DoA estimator
Input: Observations X;
1 Apply SubspaceNet to X to obtain ˆR(X; ψ);
2 Apply subspace method to estimate ˆθ from ˆR(X; ψ);
3 return ˆθ
E. Discussion
The proposed SubspaceNet leverages data by using deep
learning tools to enable subspace methods to operate reli-
ably in the presence of coherent sources, broadband signals,
limited snapshots, miscalibrated arrays, and low SNR. This
is achieved by identifying that the difficulty in dealing with
these challenges is associated with the computation of the
covariance matrix. Thus, we propose a dedicated DNN ar-
chitecture which learns to provide a surrogate covariance, by
training its output to be useful for Root-MUSIC-based DoA
recovery. The resulting SubspaceNet thus combines abstract
DNNs that enable downstream subspace-based DoA recovery
to be carried out accurately, while preserving the interpretable
operation of these model-based methods, e.g., the ability to
extract a meaningful spectrum representation, as consistently
demonstrated in Section IV.
As opposed to [30], which focused on MUSIC and had
to modify its operation for training, the inherit differentiabil-
ity of Root-MUSIC allows to train the architecture end-to-
end without affecting how the computed covariance is pro-
cessed. Once trained, SubspaceNet allows subspace methods
to achieve accurate DoA estimation in harsh conditions, while
also producing a meaningful spectrum, as demonstrated in Sec-
tion IV. This principled DNN augmentation notably enhances
subspace-based DoA recovery. Still, it induces tradeoffs in
terms of complexity and adaptivity in some settings. For
once, while SubspaceNet is notably less complex compared
to alternative data-driven methods [13], [31], the incorpora-
tion of a DNN module can be computationally expansive to
6


===== PAGE 7 =====
implement on some limited sensory devices. Moreover, while
one can envision extensions to unsupervised operation (e.g.,
by leveraging structures in the signal model [20] or in the
augmented algorithm [46]) and to adaptivity across arrays
(e.g., by on device learning [47] or using hypernetworks [48]),
in its current form, SubspaceNet is trained in a supervised
manner with sufficient data for a given array.
The derivation of SubspaceNet considers DoA recovery with
ULAs, as detailed in Subsection II-A. However, its formulation
can be extended to other forms of arrays where subspace
methods are applied for DoA recovery, including planar ar-
rays [49], circular arrays [50], and sparse arrays [51]. For the
latter, the ability of SubspaceNet to learn to overcome array
mismatches, as presented in Section IV, makes it extremely
attractive. Furthermore, while we use Root-MUSIC to train
SubspaceNet, one can also consider using ESPRIT during
training, owing to its end-to-end differentiability. Specifically,
since ESPRIT relies on signal subspace estimation (instead
of noise subspace), using it during training can be beneficial
when estimating a large number of sources. Moreover, we
note that in addition to the traditional hyperparameters of
deep learning models, SubspaceNet introduces an additional
hyperparameter, namely ϵ in (15). In our numerical study in
Section IV we keep its value fixed for all settings. Nonetheless,
one can potentially perceive ϵ as being related to the noise vari-
ance in the representation of covariance matrix for narrowband
signals in (3). This motivates exploring an SNR-dependent
setting of ϵ. We leave these extensions of SubspaceNet for
future study.
IV. NUMERICAL EVALUATION
In this section, we empirically evaluate SubspaceNet when
applied with different subspace and covariance-based estima-
tion algorithms1. Our experiments cover scenarios where as-
sumptions AS1-AS4 are not necessarily satisfied, and demon-
strate the ability of SubspaceNet to enable classic DoA estima-
tors to operate in these settings while preserving performance
and interpretability. We first detail the experimental setup
in Subsection IV-A, after which we report the performances
achieved under these setups in Subsection IV-B. We conclude
by investigating the interpretability of SubspaceNet when com-
bined with different model-based methods in Subsection IV-C.
A. Experimental Setup
1) Signal Model: Throughout this study, we consider a
ULA consisting of N = 8 sensors with M impinging sig-
nals, where we simulate different values of M. Except for
the study reported in Subsection IV-B3, where we consider
broadband settings, the signals are generated according to (1),
i.e., representing a narrowband case. The DoAs are uniformly
generated from the interval [−π
2 , π
2 ]. The SNR is defined as
SNR = 10 log10 σ2
S/σ2
V , where σ2
S is the sources variance.
2) SubspaceNet
Architecture:
As
detailed
in
Subsec-
tion III-B, SubspaceNet is comprised of a DNN autoencoder
with non-trainable preceding and subsequent processing. The
auto-correlation features in (13) are extracted for the value
1The source code used in our empirical study along with the hyperparam-
eters is available at https://github.com/ShlezingerLab/SubspaceNet
of the lag τ, which is a hyper-parameter (set via manual
tuning in our experiments), that is bounded by the number
of observations, τ ≤T −1. The autoencoder architecture
utilized is composed of three convolution layers, having 16,
32, and 64 output channels, respectively. These are followed
by three deconvolution layers with 32, 16, and 1 output
channels, respectively. The kernel size of each layer is set
to 2 × 2. The output of the autoencoder is reshaped into
a surrogate covariance via (15) with ϵ = 1. The overall
number of trainable parameters is 41, 761. The architecture
is trained using the Adam optimizer [52] with learning rate
µ = 0.001. For brevity, we use the abbreviated term SubNet
for SubspaceNet in the legends of the figures.
3) DoA Estimators: To assess the ability of SubspaceNet
to improve classic subspace methods, we evaluate the classic
subspace methods detailed in Subsection II-B, i.e., MUSIC,
Root-MUSIC, and ESPRIT, comparing their performance
when combined with SubspaceNet to that achieved when
applied with the standard empirical covariance. Specifically,
when employing MUSIC, we detect the DoAs from the
spectrum by searching for the peaks over a grid with resolution
0.01◦.
In settings where AS1-AS4 do not hold, we contrast
SubspaceNet with representative model-based extensions of
classic subspace methods designed to cope with each scenario.
In particular, for coherent sources, we employ SPS pre-
processing, which is a widely adopted model-based approach
for coping with such scenarios [6], [7]. When considering
narrowband non-coherent sources, we also compare the DoA
estimators with the corresponding Ziv-Zakai bound (ZZB)
derived in [53]. To evaluate DoA estimation under broadband
settings, we compare SubspaceNet with model-based exten-
sions for broadband signals based on the technique proposed
in [37]. This involves dividing the relevant frequency spectrum
into bins, and then applying classical narrowband subspace
methods to each bin separately, while aggregating the results
to yield a broadband estimate.
We also compare SubspaceNet to alternative DNN-based
DoA estimators. We consider two data-driven benchmarks:
1) a CNN-based DoA estimator based on the architecture
proposed in [13] coined CNN, representing a black-box DNN
design; 2) DA-MUSIC of [30], which interconnects a recurrent
neural network and a fully-connected architecture following
the flow of MUSIC. All data-driven DoA estimators are trained
on the same data, comprised of J = 45000 samples corre-
sponding to SNR of 10 dB (unless stated otherwise). When
evaluating the data-driven estimators with varying number of
sources, the data is comprised of all considered values of M,
and training is followed by adaption to the considered value of
M using 8000 samples with M sources. For the CNN model,
a grid of classes with a resolution of 0.5◦is defined, as in the
original paper, resulting in over 21 · 106 trainable parameters
(higher resolution results in a substantially large and com-
putationally intensive number of trainable parameters), while
DA-MUSIC has 10, 194 trainable parameters. Following the
approach used in [13], a dataset containing
 M
361

combinations
of angles is generated for each tested SNR, resulting in an
extensive set of over 300, 000 samples for training the CNN
7


===== PAGE 8 =====
RMSPE [◦]
M = 2
M = 3
M = 4
Root-MUSIC
12.4790
20.3972
23.2047
SPS-Root-MUSIC
1.0112
1.6369
12.1467
SubspaceNet+Root-MUSIC
0.2005
0.7219
3.8846
MUSIC
9.4709
19.0794
22.8037
SPS-MUSIC
2.5840
2.3342
18.3323
SubspaceNet+MUSIC
2.1084
4.2398
5.2482
ESPRIT
25.8426
22.4599
23.2047
SPS-ESPRIT
0.9224
3.7184
12.5477
SubspaceNet+ESPRIT
0.4761
2.4350
4.4690
DA-MUSIC
1.1860
2.6585
3.9705
CNN
0.7693
1.2438
7.4198
TABLE I: DoA accuracy, coherent sources.
model.
B. DoA Recovery Performance
Here, we evaluate the accuracy of SubspaceNet, measured
via the RMSPE. We consider settings with coherent sources
(not holding AS2); with dominant noise and limited snapshots
(not holding AS4); with broadband signals (not holding AS1);
and with miscalibrated arrays (not holding AS3). We empir-
ically evaluate the RMSPE by averaging over 5000 Monte
Carlo trials. To focus on the ability to identify the DoAs
correctly, here we set ˆ
M to the true number of DoAs M, while
in Subsection IV-C we show that ˆ
M can indeed be extracted
as an accurate estimate of M. For ease of presentation, figures
comparing DoA estimators versus SNR report performance in
terms of mean squared periodic error in dB.
1) Coherent Sources:
We first evaluate the ability of
SubspaceNet to effectively handle coherent sources. We focus
on the challenging fully coherent case, where all sources
exhibit identical phases and amplitudes, resulting in RS
having minimal unit rank. We simulate different numbers
of narrowband coherent sources estimated from T = 100
snapshots, with an SNR of 10 dB and a calibrated ULA.
The RMSPE results achieved by the considered DoA esti-
mators are reported in Table I. We observe in Table I that
SubspaceNet augmentation enables effective and consistent
handling of coherent sources, improving the performance of all
considered model-based algorithms. Notably, the augmentation
of Root-MUSIC with SubspaceNet on M = 2 sources leads
to almost 60× better estimation performance than classical
Root-MUSIC. Even when a dedicated SPS technique is used to
increase the empirical covariance rank, the SPS Root-MUSIC
algorithm results are inferior to SubspaceNet. We also observe
that while SubspaceNet was trained with Root-MUSIC, its
surrogate covariance also notably facilitates the operation of
MUSIC and ESPRIT, which both exhibit improvement in es-
timation performance compared to classical and pre-processed
estimation methods. Moreover, SubspaceNet outperforms the
data-driven benchmarks, while using much less parameters
than CNN model and maintaining a similar scale of parameter
quantity as DA-MUSIC, without limiting the interpretability of
model-based DoA estimators, as shown in Subsection IV-C.
2) Low SNR and Few Snapshots: We proceed to evaluate
the ability of SubspaceNet to facilitate coping with low SNRs
5
4
3
2
1
SNR
40
35
30
25
20
15
MSPE [dB]
ZZB
SubNet+R-MUSIC
R-MUSIC
SubNet+ESPRIT
ESPRIT
SubNet+MUSIC
MUSIC
DA-MUSIC
CNN
Fig. 4: DoA estimation MSPE, T = 200, non-coherent sources
and a limited number of snapshots. Such conditions are recog-
nized to profoundly deteriorate model-based DoA estimation.
To pinpoint the gains of SubspaceNet, we first consider only
low SNRs with M = 2 non-coherent sources, after which
we limit the number of snapshots, and then replace the
sources with coherent ones, while systematically contrasting
SubspaceNet-aided DoA estimators with the classic model-
based operation for each scenario. In experiments conducted
with multiple SNRs, the training data used by data-driven
estimators is that of the lowest SNR considered in the range.
We thus commence with considering highly noisy obser-
vations with SNRs in the range of [−5, 0] dB. The signals
are non-coherent and the number of snapshots is T = 200.
Since SPS is not designed to enhance subpsace methods
in such scenarios with non-coherent sources and sufficient
snapshots, we do not include SPS-based subspace methods
here. Accordingly, we focus on comparing their operation
with the conventional empirical covariance to that provided
by SubspaceNet. The results, reported in Fig. 4, demonstrate
that SubspaceNet augmentations notably improve the ability
of subspace-based DoA estimators in coping with high noise
levels. These results emphasize that SubspaceNet can not only
mitigate the harmful effects of coherency, but also effectively
enhance the SNR, leading to improved accuracy in DoA
estimation, while reaching performance within a limited gap
from the lower bound on the achievable accuracy dictated by
the ZZB.
We proceed to considering the challenging setting where
merely T = 2 snapshots are employed. Here, we set the
SNR to be in the range of [5, 10] dB. The resulting DoA
estimation accuracy, depicted in Fig. 5, clearly shows that
the incorporation of SubspaceNet into classical model-based
methods enables them to effectively handle few observations,
even in a scenarios where these methods are typically un-
feasible, i.e., where the number of snapshots is not larger
than the number of sources. Moreover, the performance of
SubspaceNet continues to improve as the SNR increases, while
the estimation accuracy of classical model-based methods is
dominated by their inability to cope with few snapshots, and
8


===== PAGE 9 =====
5
6
7
8
9
10
SNR
30
25
20
15
10
5
MSPE [dB]
ZZB
SubNet+R-MUSIC
SPS+R-MUSIC
R-MUSIC
SubNet+ESPRIT
SPS+ESPRIT
ESPRIT
SubNet+MUSIC
SPS+MUSIC
MUSIC
DA-MUSIC
CNN
Fig. 5: DoA estimation MSPE, T = 2, non-coherent sources
Algorithm
RMSPE [◦]
MUSIC
25.8134
SPS+MUSIC
8.0758
SubspaceNet+MUSIC
2.2532
ESPRIT
29.0632
SPS+ESPRIT
11.0179
SubspaceNet+ESPRIT
1.9675
Root-MUSIC
26.3560
SPS+Root-MUSIC
8.2735
SubspaceNet+Root-MUSIC
1.8907
DA-MUSIC
4.7326
CNN
9.6053
TABLE II: M = 2 coherent signals, T = 2, SNR=5 dB
thus does not notably improve with SNR.
We next introduce coherent sources, assessing the ability
of SubspaceNet in handling settings not meeting both AS2
and AS4. We compare the augmentation of subspace methods
with SubspaceNet to their model-based counterparts in Fig. 6
under low SNRs with T
= 200 snapshots (Fig. 6a) and
under moderate SNRs with merely T = 20 and T = 2
snapshots (Figs. 6b-6c, respectively). For brevity and to avoid
cluttering, we include two subspace methods in these figures
– Root-MUSIC and ESPRIT – applying each with the conven-
tional empirical covariance, with SPS, and with SubspaceNet.
The results show that the surrogate covariance of SubspaceNet
enables reliable subspace-based DoA estimation even in an
extreme scenario where AS2 and AS4 are both violated. This
is also evident in Table II, which reports the RMSPE values
achieved for SNR of 5 dB, comparing SubspaceNet also to
the data-driven benchmarks, whose performance is inferior to
that of SubspaceNet.
To further showcase the ability of SubspaceNet to enable
subspace methods to cope with limited snapshots, we evaluate
the RMSPE of the considered methods for different number
of snapshots. As in Figs. 6b-6c, we consider M = 2 coherent
sources at SNR of 5 dB, and report the performance of
Root-MUSIC and ESPRIT with and without SubspaceNet
compared to the data-driven benchmarks in Fig. 7. We observe
in Fig. 7 that subspace methods combined with SubspaceNet
consistently achieve improved accuracy, and that SubspaceNet
allows subspace methods to operate reliably with limited
snapshots. Conventional covariance processing methods reach
an error floor, and possibly even degrade in some cases when
combining more snapshots representing coherent sources.
3) Broadband settings: The scenarios considered so far
were all based on the narrowband formulation in (1). Here,
we evaluate SubspaceNet under broadband settings. In such
cases, one can formulate the signal model in the frequency
domain, which at frequency ω is given by [37]
X(ω) = A(ω, θ)S(ω) + V(ω).
(17)
In (1), X(ω) and S(ω) are the discrete-time multivariate
Fourier transforms of x(t) and s(t), respectively, V(ω) is
noise, and the steering vectors comprising A(ω, θ) are
a(ω, θ) =
h
1, e−jω d
c sin θ, . . . , e−jω(M−1) d
c sin θ
i
,
(18)
with d denoting the element spacing of the ULA, and c being
the propagation velocity.
We simulate the time-domain broadband signals using
orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) with L
sub-carriers, where each carrier. denoted sm,l for the lth
subcarrier of the mth signal, is modulated independently with
a zero-mean complex-Gaussian unit variance distribution. The
overall OFDM signal can be expressed as:
s(OFDM)
m
(t) = 1
L
L−1
X
l=0
sm,le2πjl
Bf
Lfs t
(19)
where fs is the sampling frequency, and Bf is the signal
bandwidth. The acquired observations are generated following
(17), where the inter-element spacing is given by half the
minimal wavelength d = c/2Bf. We generate M = 2 OFDM
signals with L = 500 subcarriers, setting Bf = 0.5 kHz.
Various sampling rates ranging from 50 to 1000 Hz are tested,
while the signals are observed for a duration of 1 second, thus
the number of snapshots is T = 1/fs. The performance of
SubspaceNet is evaluated for all sampling rates, despite being
trained solely on observations sampled at 0.2 kHz.
We evaluate the performance of MUSIC, Root-MUSIC, and
ESPRIT when combined with SubspaceNet and when using
the conventional empirical covariance, as well as compared to
the broadband extension of MUSIC proposed in [37] which
divides the bandwidth into 50 separate bins. The results,
depicted in Fig. 8, consider both non-coherent as well as
coherent sources. The non-coherent results depicted in Fig. 8a
demonstrate that the incorporation of SubspaceNet models
leads to significantly improved performance in comparison to
narrowband methods and the broadband extension of MUSIC.
SubspaceNet consistently enables reliable DoA estimation,
even when a minimal number of snapshots are available, with
fs = 50 Hz. These findings also hold when the sources are
coherent, as demonstrated in Fig. 8b. In contrast, as expected,
the subspace model-based broadband extension is unable to
estimate DoAs under both coherent and broadband conditions.
To numerically capture the exact gains of SubspaceNet,
9


===== PAGE 10 =====
5
4
3
2
1
SNR
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
MSPE [dB]
SubNet+R-MUSIC
SPS+R-MUSIC
R-MUSIC
SubNet+ESPRIT
SPS+ESPRIT
ESPRIT
DA-MUSIC
CNN
(a) T = 200, low SNR
5
6
7
8
9
10
SNR
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
MSPE [dB]
SubNet+R-MUSIC
SPS+R-MUSIC
R-MUSIC
SubNet+ESPRIT
SPS+ESPRIT
ESPRIT
DA-MUSIC
CNN
(b) T = 20, moderate SNR
5
6
7
8
9
10
SNR
25
20
15
10
5
MSPE [dB]
SubNet+R-MUSIC
SPS+R-MUSIC
R-MUSIC
SubNet+ESPRIT
SPS+ESPRIT
ESPRIT
DA-MUSIC
CNN
(c) T = 2, moderate SNR
Fig. 6: DoA estimation, SNR & minor snapshots, coherent sources
Fig. 7: DoA estimation accuracy versus T, M = 2 coherent
sources, moderate SNR
Algorithm
RMSPE [◦]
MUSIC
26.7513
Broadband MUSIC
7.06456
DA MUSIC
4.74523
CNN
26.7439
SubspaceNet+MUSIC
2.2861
SubspaceNet+ESPRIT
3.7127
SubspaceNet+Root-MUSIC
2.3376
TABLE III: RMSPE results, M = 2 broadband OFDM signals
we report the RMSPE values achieved by SubspaceNet in
the broadband setting with M = 2 coherent sources and
a sampling rate of fs
= 200Hz in Table III. We also
include the accuracy achieved by the data-driven DA-MUSIC
and CNN benchmarks. Table III showcases that SubspaceNet
allows model-based subspace methods to achieve substantially
improved accuracy in broadband settings, surpassing the data-
driven benchmarks, as well as model-based methods designed
for broadband settings, whose inference procedure is more
complex as they require separate DoA estimation for each bin.
4) Array Miscalibration: Here, we investigate the effective-
ness of SubspaceNet in learning from data to handle array
miscalibrations. The calibration of the array manifold is a
critical aspect of DoA estimation, as inaccurate calibration
can lead to substantial errors. We simulate two forms of
miscalibrations, which both cause the actual array response
to deviate from the ideal pattern, significantly affecting the
performance of subspace methods. In both scenarios, the
received signal is comprised of M = 2 non-coherent signals.
In the first scenario, array distance miscalibration is simu-
lated, where the spacing between each pair of sensors deviates
from the standard ULA configuration of half-wavelength, re-
sulting in non-uniform element spacing. The spacing between
each adjacent pair of sensors in the mth position is established
as the nominal half-wavelength distance d plus a uniformly
distributed random variable denoted as δm
∼U(−η, η),
where η is the percentage of deviation from the nominal
spacing. Consequently, the steering vector in (2) becomes
miscalibrated, with it mth element now given by
[a(θ)]m ≜e−2πj (d+δm)(m−1)
c
sin(θ),
m ∈{1, . . . , M}. (20)
The resulting RMSPE values achieved by subspace-based
DoA estimators with and without SubspaceNet are reported in
Fig. 9a, for different values of η ∈[0.025d, 0.15d], i.e., a maxi-
mum deviation of 30% from the calibrated spacing. The results
depicted in Fig. 9a underscore the ability of SubspaceNet to
deal with discrepancies in the array geometry, particularly
when the steering vector is affected by non-uniform (and
non-nominal) elements spacing. In contrast, classical subspace
methods heavily rely on the nominal ULA form of the array
manifold, yielding non-optimal estimation as η increases.
In the second scenario, we introduce miscalibration directly
in the steering vector, rather than in the element spacing. This
is achieved by adding a zero-mean complex-Gaussian noise
with variance σ2
sv to each element in the steering vector, result-
ing in mismatches in the creation of the subspace core equation
(7). The simulation results depicted in Fig. 9b further indicate
that SubspaceNet indeed exhibits superior performance over
traditional subspace methods when handling steering vector
corruption due to the addition of zero-mean Gaussian noise,
resulting in more accurate DoA estimation. On the other hand,
classical subspace methods appear to be highly sensitive to this
type of corruption, leading to poor estimation results as the
noise variance increases. Additionally, the results indicate that
the performance gap between traditional subspace methods
10


===== PAGE 11 =====
102
103
Observations
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
RMSPE [ ]
SubNet+R-MUSIC
SubNet+MUSIC
SubNet+ESPRIT
BB-MUSIC
MUSIC
ESPRIT
R-MUSIC
DA-MUSIC
CNN
(a) Non-coherent OFDM signals
102
103
Observations
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
RMSPE [ ]
SubNet+R-MUSIC
SubNet+MUSIC
SubNet+ESPRIT
BB-MUSIC
MUSIC
ESPRIT
R-MUSIC
DA-MUSIC
CNN
(b) Coherent OFDM signals
Fig. 8: Broadband DoA estimation comparison, for various observations
and SubspaceNet increases as the level of steering vector
corruption increases, for both σ2
sv = 0.75 and η = 0.075d.
This suggests that SubspaceNet could potentially provide more
significant benefits in scenarios with higher levels of noise
corruption and geometry mismatches, making it a promising
solution for applications in challenging environments.
C. Interpretability
The results presented so far systematically demonstrate
that the augmentation of subspace methods with SubspaceNet
enables these classic algorithms to operate reliably in scenarios
where their traditionally limiting assumptions AS1-AS4 do not
hold. Specifically, SubspaceNet outputs a surrogate covariance
matrix which enables subspace methods to operate in an unal-
tered manner in various challenging scenarios: It can efficient
cope with wideband signals; accurately resolve coherent sig-
nals; operate reliably with few snapshots and high noise levels;
and boost robustness to different forms of miscallibrations.
These gains stem from the fact that SubspaceNet leverages
the abstractness of DNNs to learn a desirable mapping from
data, which here is the extraction of a suitable covariance
matrix. An additional key gain of SubspaceNet, which is not
shared by conventional DNN-based solutions, is its ability to
preserve the desirable interpretable operation of model-based
DoA estimators, and in fact provide meaningful visual repre-
sentations associated with classic methods in settings where
these are typically not achievable. To show this property of
SubspaceNet, we first visualize its ability to yield distinguish-
able signal and noise subspaces. Then we show the spectrum
representations obtained by MUSIC and Root-MUSIC when
combined with SubspaceNet, after which we demonstrate
that SubspaceNet can yield meaningful beampatterns when
combined with covariance-based beamformers that are not
necessarily based on subspace methods, such as MVDR.
1) Subspace Separation: We commence with a compari-
son of the normalized covariance eigenvalues produced by
SubspaceNet compared with the conventional and the SPS-
aided empirical estimation of the covariance for coherent
sources. The results, depicted in Fig. 10, demonstrate that
SubspaceNet yields a clear separation between the M = 3
dominant eigenvalues of the signal subspace and those associ-
ated with noise. In contrast, conventional empirical estimation
is only capable of identifying one eigenvalue associated with
the signal subspace, whereas the SPS empirical estimation
method can identify only two eigenvalues, with the remaining
eigenvalues attributed to the noise subspace. The capability
of SubspaceNet to distinguish between the two subspaces
significantly enhances resolving coherent sources compared
to model-based subspace methods.
2) Spectrum Presentation: When assumptions AS1 to AS4
hold, subspace methods demonstrate informative spectral rep-
resentations that are strongly correlated with the true DoAs.
Specifically, the MUSIC spectrum displays distinct peaks at
the DoA angles, while the Root-MUSIC polar spectra exhibit
roots and eigenvalues corresponding to the DoA locations on
the unit circle. We next investigate the spectral behavior of
each subspace method and its SubspaceNet augmentation, over
the following scenarios in which AS1-AS4 are violated:
1) DoA estimation of narrowband coherent sources, i.e.,
AS2 does not hold. The DoAs are located at θ =
[−12.34◦, 34.56◦, 65.78◦], and are observed via T = 100
snapshots at SNR of 10 dB. The resulting MUSIC and
Root-MUSIC spectra are illustrated in Fig. 11.
2) Scenario where AS2 and AS4 do not hold, using the
same settings as in the study reported in Table II, with
sources at θ = [23.45◦, 56.78◦]. The resulting MUSIC
and Root-MUSIC spectra are illustrated in Fig. 12.
3) DoA estimation of broadband coherent sources, located
at θ = [−45.67◦, −23.45◦], from T = 50 snapshots. The
model-based spectrum here is no longer informative in
representing the true DoA, as illustrated in Fig. 13.
We observe in Figs. 11-13, that SubspaceNet produces
an interpretable and informative spectrum. The roots clos-
est to the unit circle in the SubspaceNet+Root-MUSIC
spectrum (Figs. 11c-13c) and the distinct peaks in the
11


===== PAGE 12 =====
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
[ ]
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
RMSPE [ ]
SubNet+R-MUSIC
SubNet+MUSIC
SubNet+ESPRIT
MUSIC
R-MUSIC
ESPRIT
CNN
(a) Mismatch due to deviation from half-wavelength spacing
.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
2
sv
2
4
6
8
10
RMSPE [ ]
SubNet+R-MUSIC
SubNet+MUSIC
SubNet+ESPRIT
MUSIC
R-MUSIC
ESPRIT
CNN
(b) Mismatch due to noisy steering vectors
Fig. 9: Miscalibrated array DoA estimation comparison
2
4
6
8
Index
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Eigenvalues [ ]
Empirical
SPS
SubNet
Fig. 10: Normalized eigenvalues of empirical, SPS and
SubspaceNet covariance matrices. M = 3 coherent sources.
SubspaceNet+MUSIC spectrum (Figs. 11a-13a) can be easily
linked to the actual DoAs. On the other hand, classical
MUSIC and Root-MUSIC algorithms are unable to produce
meaningful spectrum representations. While MUSIC spectrum
for narrowband coherent sources (Fig. 11a) may reveal minor
peaks near the source angles, it horribly fails to provide any
meaningful information for the scenarios depicted Figs. 12a-
13a. Furthermore, SubspaceNet enables a more distinguishable
spectrum. As shown in Figs. 11c-13c, the non-DoA roots are
pushed further away from the unit circle, facilitating their
distinction from true DoA roots. The resulting Root-MUSIC
spectrum becomes more interpretable , especially in challeng-
ing scenarios. This is clearly observed in the scenario with a
small number of snapshots in Fig. 12c, where a non-DoA root
which located close to the true DoA, at θ = 28.4◦, is pushed
from the unit circle (|root| > 8), preventing misclassification.
3) Beamforming Pattern: We conclude by demonstrating
that the surrogate covariance produced by SubspaceNet is
useful not only for subpsace methods, but also for other forms
of covariance-based array processing algorithms. To exemplify
this, we consider MVDR [45], which is a popular beamform-
ing method that enhances the signal power in the desired
direction while suppressing noise and interference. This results
in a beampattern that provides valuable information about the
directions of the sources of interest. Although MVDR does not
rely on subspace decomposition for its beamforming operation,
it employs the covariance matrix to shape its pattern, and hence
it is subject to the same empirical estimation limitations as
classical subspace methods, and its effectiveness is still limited
by the accuracy of the covariance matrix estimate.
To show that SubspaceNet facilitates the operation of
MVDR, we visualize the beampattern achieved by MVDR
with and without SubspaceNet augmentation in Fig. 14, under
the same settings used in Subsection IV-C2. The beampatterns
depicted in Fig. 14 clearly demonstrate the superiority of
SubspaceNet in producing surrogate covariance matrices that
are useful not only for DoA estimation subspace methods, but
also to obtain high resolution effective beampatterns. Specif-
ically, Figs. 14a-14b demonstrate that SubspaceNet produces
narrow lobes in the direction of the sources, enhancing the
discrimination between sources, and mitigating interference
by reducing the power in non-DoA directions. When using the
conventional empirical covariance, MVDR exhibits limitations
in achieving these objectives in scenarios with multiple coher-
ent sources and low SNR. Additionally, like subspace methods,
MVDR is inherently limited in its ability to handle broadband
sources. This shortcoming leads to a beampattern that deviates
significantly from the true DoAs, as shown in Fig. 14a.
Nonetheless, by integrating the SubspaceNet augmentation, the
received signal power in the desired directions is amplified,
which enhances the effectiveness of beamforming for signals
with both broadband and coherent characteristics.
12


===== PAGE 13 =====
100
75
50
25
0
25
50
75
100
Angels [deg]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Amplitude
SubNet+MUSIC
MUSIC
(a) MUSIC & SubspaceNet+MUSIC
-90°
-60°
-30°
0°
30°
60°
90°
0
1
(b) Root-MUSIC
-90°
-60°
-30°
0°
30°
60°
90°
0
1
2
3
(c) SubspaceNet+Root-MUSIC
Fig. 11: Spectrum representation: M = 3 narrowband coherent sources
100
75
50
25
0
25
50
75
100
Angels [deg]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Amplitude
SubNet+MUSIC
MUSIC
(a) MUSIC & SubspaceNet+MUSIC
-90°
-60°
-30°
0°
30°
60°
90°
0
1
2
(b) Root-MUSIC
-90°
-60°
-30°
0°
30°
60°
90°
0 1 2
8
(c) SubspaceNet+Root-MUSIC
Fig. 12: Spectrum representation: M = 2 narrowband coherent sources with few snapshots & moderate SNR
100
75
50
25
0
25
50
75
100
Angels [deg]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Amplitude
SubNet+MUSIC
MUSIC
BB-MUSIC
(a) MUSIC & SubspaceNet+MUSIC
-90°
-60°
-30°
0°
30°
60°
90°
0
1
(b) Broadband & coherent, T = 50
-90°
-60°
-30°
0°
30°
60°
90°
0
1
2
(c) Broadband & coherent, T = 50
Fig. 13: Spectrum representation: M = 3 Wide-band coherent sources
-90°
-60°
-30°
0°
30°
60°
90°
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SubNet+MVDR
MVDR
(a) narrowband & coherent, M = 3.
-90°
-60°
-30°
0°
30°
60°
90°
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SubNet+MVDR
MVDR
(b) narrowband & coherent, low SNR.
-90°
-60°
-30°
0°
30°
60°
90°
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SubNet+MVDR
MVDR
(c) Broadband & coherent
Fig. 14: SubspaceNet & MVDR beampattern comparison
13


===== PAGE 14 =====
V. CONCLUSIONS
We proposed SubspaceNet, which enables subspace-based
DoA estimation in challenging settings where a reliable di-
vision of the array input into signal and noise subspaces is
typically infeasible. SubspaceNet is designed by augment-
ing subspace methods with deep learning tools, and it is
particularly trained to produce a surrogate covariance that
is universally useful for subspace-based DoA estimation by
identifying Root-MUSIC as a suitable differentiable method
and converting it into a trainable architecture. SubspaceNet
leverages data to learn to divide the observations into signal
and noise subspaces. Our results demonstrate its ability to
successfully cope with coherent sources, broadband signals,
few snapshots, low SNR, and array miscalibrations, while
preserving the interpretability of model-based subspace meth-
ods, and facilitating the operation of other covariance-based
algorithms such as MVDR.
REFERENCES
[1] D. H. Shmuel, J. P. Merkofer, G. Revach, R. J. G. van Sloun, and
N. Shlezinger, “Deep root MUSIC algorithm for data-driven DoA
estimation,” in IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2023.
[2] J. Benesty, I. Cohen, and J. Chen, Fundamentals of signal enhancement
and array signal processing.
John Wiley & Sons, 2017.
[3] R. Schmidt, “Multiple emitter location and signal parameter estimation,”
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 276–280, 1986.
[4] A. J. Barabell, “Improving the resolution performance of eigenstructure-
based direction-finding algorithms,” in IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 1983.
[5] R. Roy and T. Kailath, “ESPRIT-estimation of signal parameters via
rotational invariance techniques,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal
Process., vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 984–995, 1989.
[6] H. Wang, K. R. Liu, and H. Anderson, “Spatial smoothing for arrays with
arbitrary geometry,” in IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 1994.
[7] C. Qi, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, and Y. Han, “Spatial difference smoothing
for DoA estimation of coherent signals,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett.,
vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 800–802, 2005.
[8] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
no. 7553, p. 436, 2015.
[9] M. Chen, Y. Gong, and X. Mao, “Deep neural network for estimation
of direction of arrival with antenna array,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
140 688–140 698, 2020.
[10] J. Cong, X. Wang, M. Huang, and L. Wan, “Robust DOA estimation
method for MIMO radar via deep neural networks,” IEEE Sensors J.,
vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 7498–7507, 2021.
[11] W. Zhu and M. Zhang, “A deep learning architecture for broadband
doa estimation,” in IEEE International Conference on Communication
Technology (ICCT), 2019, pp. 244–247.
[12] S. Chakrabarty and E. A. P. Habets, “Broadband DoA estimation using
convolutional neural networks trained with noise signals,” in IEEE
Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics
(WASPAA), 2017, pp. 136–140.
[13] G. K. Papageorgiou, M. Sellathurai, and Y. C. Eldar, “Deep networks
for direction-of-arrival estimation in low SNR,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 69, pp. 3714–3729, 2021.
[14] L. Wu, Z.-M. Liu, and Z.-T. Huang, “Deep convolution network for
direction of arrival estimation with sparse prior,” IEEE Signal Process.
Lett., vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 1688–1692, 2019.
[15] H. Lee, Y. Kim, S. Seol, and J. Chung, “Deep learning-based near-
field source localization without a priori knowledge of the number of
sources,” vol. 10, pp. 55 360–55 368, 2022.
[16] Y. Qin, “Deep networks for direction of arrival estimation with sparse
prior in low SNR,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 44 637–44 648, 2023.
[17] X. Lan, H. Zhai, and Y. Wang, “A novel DOA estimation of closely
spaced sources using attention mechanism with conformal arrays,” IEEE
Access, vol. 11, pp. 44 010–44 018, 2023.
[18] M. L. Lima de Oliveira and M. J. G. Bekooij, “ResNet applied for a
single-snapshot DOA estimation,” in IEEE Radar Conference (Radar-
Conf), 2022.
[19] D. Hu, Y. Zhang, L. He, and J. Wu, “Low-complexity deep-learning-
based DOA estimation for hybrid massive MIMO systems with uniform
circular arrays,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 83–86,
2020.
[20] F. Weißer, M. Baur, and W. Utschick, “Unsupervised parameter esti-
mation using model-based decoder,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01849,
2022.
[21] D. Chen, S. Shi, X. Gu, and B. Shim, “Robust DoA estimation using
denoising autoencoder and deep neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 10,
pp. 52 551–52 564, 2022.
[22] A. M. Elbir, “DeepMUSIC: Multiple signal classification via deep
learning,” IEEE Sensors Letters, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 1–4, 2020.
[23] C. Liu, W. Feng, H. Li, and H. Zhu, “Single snapshot DOA estimation
based on spatial smoothing MUSIC and CNN,” in IEEE International
Conference on Signal Processing, Communications and Computing
(ICSPCC), 2021.
[24] D. T. Hoang and K. Lee, “Deep learning-aided coherent direction-
of-arrival estimation with the FTMR algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 70, pp. 1118–1130, 2022.
[25] Z. Jiang, J. Xin, W. Zuo, N. Zheng, and A. Sano, “A Toeplitz prior-based
deep learning framework for DOA estimation with unknown mutual
coupling,” in European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 1544–1548.
[26] X. Wu, X. Yang, X. Jia, and F. Tian, “A gridless DOA estimation method
based on convolutional neural network with Toeplitz prior,” IEEE Signal
Process. Lett., vol. 29, pp. 1247–1251, 2022.
[27] A. Barthelme and W. Utschick, “DoA estimation using neural network-
based covariance matrix reconstruction,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett.,
vol. 28, pp. 783–787, 2021.
[28] J. Ji, W. Mao, F. Xi, and S. Chen, “TransMUSIC: A transformer-
aided subspace method for DOA estimation with low-resolution ADCs,”
in IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), 2024, pp. 8576–8580.
[29] X. Xu and Q. Huang, “MD-DOA: A model-based deep learning DOA
estimation architecture,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 20 240–
20 253, 2024.
[30] J. P. Merkofer, G. Revach, N. Shlezinger, and R. J. van Sloun, “Deep
augmented MUSIC algorithm for data-driven DoA estimation,” in IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2022, pp. 3598–3602.
[31] J. P. Merkofer, G. Revach, N. Shlezinger, and R. J. Routtenberg, Tirza
an van Sloun, “Data-driven DoA estimation via deep augmented MUSIC
algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 2, pp. 2771–2785,
2024.
[32] H. Al Kassir, Z. D. Zaharis, P. I. Lazaridis, N. V. Kantartzis, T. V.
Yioultsis, and T. D. Xenos, “A review of the state of the art and future
challenges of deep learning-based beamforming,” IEEE Access, 2022.
[33] N. Shlezinger, J. Whang, Y. C. Eldar, and A. G. Dimakis, “Model-based
deep learning,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 111, no. 5, pp. 465–499, 2023.
[34] N. Shlezinger, Y. C. Eldar, and S. P. Boyd, “Model-based deep learning:
On the intersection of deep learning and optimization,” IEEE Access,
vol. 10, pp. 115 384–115 398, 2022.
[35] N. Shlezinger and T. Routtenberg, “Discriminative and generative learn-
ing for linear estimation of random signals [lecture notes],” IEEE Signal
Process. Mag., vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 75–82, 2023, early access.
[36] L. C. Godara, Smart antennas.
CRC press, 2004.
[37] Y.-S. Yoon, L. M. Kaplan, and J. H. McClellan, “TOPS: new DOA
estimator for wideband signals,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54,
no. 6, pp. 1977–1989, 2006.
[38] P. Stoica, R. L. Moses et al., Spectral analysis of signals.
Pearson
Prentice Hall Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2005, vol. 452.
[39] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press,
2016, http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[40] B. Luijten, R. Cohen, F. J. de Bruijn, H. A. W. Schmeitz, M. Mischi,
Y. C. Eldar, and R. J. G. van Sloun, “Adaptive ultrasound beamforming
using deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 3967–
3978, 2020.
[41] T. Routtenberg and J. Tabrikian, “Bayesian parameter estimation using
periodic cost functions,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 60, no. 3, pp.
1229–1240, 2012.
[42] J. Bolte, T. Le, E. Pauwels, and T. Silveti-Falls, “Nonsmooth implicit
differentiation for machine-learning and optimization,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 34, pp. 13 537–13 549, 2021.
14


===== PAGE 15 =====
[43] O. Solomon, R. Cohen, Y. Zhang, Y. Yang, Q. He, J. Luo, R. J. van
Sloun, and Y. C. Eldar, “Deep unfolded robust PCA with application to
clutter suppression in ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., 2019.
[44] A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, G. Chanan, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, Z. Lin,
A. Desmaison, L. Antiga, and A. Lerer, “Automatic differentiation in
PyTorch,” 2017.
[45] J. Capon, “High-resolution frequency-wavenumber spectrum analysis,”
Proc. IEEE, vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 1408–1418, 1969.
[46] G. Revach, N. Shlezinger, T. Locher, X. Ni, R. J. van Sloun, and Y. C.
Eldar, “Unsupervised learned Kalman filtering,” in European Signal
Processing Conference (EUSIPCO).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 1571–1575.
[47] T. Raviv, S. Park, O. Simeone, Y. C. Eldar, and N. Shlezinger, “Adaptive
and flexible model-based AI for deep receivers in dynamic channels,”
IEEE Wireless Commun., 2024.
[48] X. Ni, G. Revach, and N. Shlezinger, “Adaptive KalmanNet: Data-driven
Kalman filter with fast adaptation,” in IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2024, pp. 5970–
5974.
[49] F.-J. Chen, S. Kwong, and C.-W. Kok, “ESPRIT-like two-dimensional
DOA estimation for coherent signals,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron.
Syst., vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 1477–1484, 2010.
[50] J.-J. Fuchs, “On the application of the global matched filter to DOA
estimation with uniform circular arrays,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 702–709, 2001.
[51] M. Guo, Y. D. Zhang, and T. Chen, “DOA estimation using compressed
sparse array,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 66, no. 15, pp. 4133–
4146, 2018.
[52] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[53] Z. Zhang, Z. Shi, and Y. Gu, “Ziv-Zakai bound for DOAs estimation,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 71, pp. 136–149, 2022.
15
