

===== PAGE 1 =====
DA-MUSIC: Data-Driven DoA Estimation via Deep
Augmented MUSIC Algorithm
Julian P. Merkofer, Student Member, IEEE, Guy Revach, Student Member, IEEE, Nir Shlezinger, Member, IEEE,
Tirza Routtenberg, Senior Member, IEEE, and Ruud J. G. van Sloun, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Direction of arrival (DoA) estimation of multiple
signals is pivotal in sensor array signal processing. A popular
multi-signal DoA estimation method is the multiple signal clas-
siﬁcation (MUSIC) algorithm, which enables high-performance
super-resolution DoA recovery while being highly applicable in
practice. MUSIC is a model-based algorithm, relying on an
accurate mathematical description of the relationship between
the signals and the measurements and assumptions on the signals
themselves (non-coherent, narrowband sources). As such, it is
sensitive to model imperfections. In this work we propose to over-
come these limitations of MUSIC by augmenting the algorithm
with speciﬁcally designed neural architectures. Our proposed
deep augmented MUSIC (DA-MUSIC) algorithm is thus a hybrid
model-based/data-driven DoA estimator, which leverages data
to improve performance and robustness while preserving the
interpretable ﬂow of the classic method. DA-MUSIC is shown
to learn to overcome limitations of the purely model-based
method, such as its inability to successfully localize coherent
sources as well as estimate the number of coherent signal sources
present. We further demonstrate the superior resolution of the
DA-MUSIC algorithm in synthetic narrowband and broadband
scenarios as well as with real-world data of DoA estimation from
seismic signals.
I. INTRODUCTION
Source separation, localization, and tracking are crucial tasks
in sensor array processing. In particular, direction of arrival
(DoA) estimation of multiple, broadband, and possibly coherent
signal sources plays a key role in a wide range of applications,
including radar, communications, image analysis, and speech
enhancement [2]–[4]. Over the last decades, a multitude of
different DoA estimation algorithms have been proposed, and
the problem is an active area of research [5], [6].
A leading scheme employed in many DoA applications is the
popular multiple signal classiﬁcation (MUSIC) algorithm [7],
which can provide asymptotically unbiased estimates of the
number of incident wavefronts present, their approximate fre-
quencies, and their DoAs. MUSIC and other classic approaches,
e.g., conventional beamforming [8] and MVDR beamform-
ing [9], are based on knowledge of the underlying statistical
model; this dependency induces several key limitations. Among
the drawbacks of the model-based (MB) approaches is the
inherent limitation of the signal model from which they are
Parts of this work were presented in the 2022 IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP) as the paper [1]. J. P.
Merkofer is with the EE Dpt., Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven,
The Netherlands (e-mail: j.p.merkofer@tue.nl), this work was partially done
while being with the ETH Z¨urich. G. Revach is with the D-ITET, ETH Z¨urich,
Switzerland, (email: grevach@ethz.ch). N. Shlezinger and T. Routtenberg are
with the School of ECE, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva,
Israel (e-mail: {nirshl; tirzar}@bgu.ac.il). T. Routtenberg is also with the ECE
Dpt., Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, United States. R. J. G. van Sloun
is with the EE Dpt., Eindhoven University of Technology, and with Phillips
Research, Eindhoven, The Netherlands (e-mail: r.j.g.v.sloun@tue.nl).
derived, which considers narrowband signals. This results, for
example, in the inability to consistently estimate the DoA of
correlated (coherent) signals, as well as a failure to resolve
closely spaced signals with an insufﬁcient number of samples
or a low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [5], [7].
To extend narrowband models to broadband DoA esti-
mation, various extensions and alternative approaches have
been explored [10], because when the impinging signals
are broadband, multiple frequency ranges can carry different
information regarding the DoA angles at hand. Generally, these
extensions from narrowband to broadband can be subdivided
into coherent and incoherent processing methods. In coherent
processing methods, the covariance matrices of the observations
in different frequency bins are coherently combined using
certain transformation matrices. Most coherent techniques are
based on the coherent signal subspace (CSS) concept [11],
which focuses the transformations of the covariances at
different frequencies into a surrogate narrowband model, yet
utilizes different transformation matrices. Incoherent broadband
processing methods combine DoA estimates obtained separately
for each frequency bin [12].
The recent success of data-driven (DD) deep learning
(DL) across a wide range of disciplines gave rise to neural
network (NN)-aided DoA estimators [13]. The works [14]–[17]
implemented model-agnostic DoA estimation using a dense NN,
a convolutional NN (CNN), a sparse-connected CNN, and a U-
Net architecture, respectively. Other methods [18], [19] utilize
the knowledge of the spatial covariance matrices, where [18]
trained a CNN based on a classiﬁcation task (allowing it to also
operate with unknown number of sources) and [19] analyzed
purely DD estimators and DD methods in combination with
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). The works [20], [21]
also combined DL with MLE by using multiple dense NNs
and a ResNet, respectively, to estimate a subset of candidate
angles. [22] extends the architecture of [21] to estimate the
number of sources with the ResNet. While such black-box
NNs enable handling array imperfections due to their model-
agnostic nature, they involve highly parameterized models that
may be computationally intensive and lack the interpretability
of MB methods.
Alternatively, NNs were used to robustify the MB MUSIC
as a form of hybrid MB/DD system [23], [24]. Speciﬁcally,
the work [25]and [26] proposed to estimate the discretized
MUSIC spectrum from the (spatially smoothed) covariance
matrix of the measurements through the utilization of multiple
convolutional NNs. While these methods are more robust
to model inaccuracies compared with the original MUSIC
algorithm, utilizing the MUSIC spectrum as a label for
training causes them to experience the same drawbacks as
1
arXiv:2109.10581v5  [eess.SP]  11 Jan 2023


===== PAGE 2 =====
their MB counterpart. Another DD approach proposed in [27]
considered systems with subarray sampling and uses NNs to
obtain a single estimated covariance matrix from incoherent
subarray measurements. This NN-aided estimate is utilized
for DoA recovery via the subspace-based MUSIC algorithm.
The method addresses the fundamental dependency of MUSIC
on the estimated covariance matrix, thereby robustifying the
MUSIC algorithm, yet it does not fully exploit the NNs’
ability to improve MUSIC, as the NN is trained using the
true covariance matrix as a label, without considering its
downstream task. Furthermore, the work [28] proposed a hybrid
MB/DD approach that includes an eigenvalue decomposition
(EVD) of full-row Toeplitz matrices reconstruction (FTMR)
matrices [29] and classiﬁcation deep NNs for estimation of
a MUSIC-like spectrum and detection of number of sources
present via eigenvectors and eigenvalues
The works [30], [31] applied CNNs for broadband DoA
estimation of a single source. The two approaches, however,
utilize very different preprocessing methods and are trained
as classiﬁcation and regression tasks, respectively. While the
classiﬁcation approach limits itself to a ﬁxed resolution, the
regressor of [31] outputs the DoA angles directly. Therefore, it
can achieve an arbitrary resolution, yet it is limited to the
spatial covariance matrix as input. Another approach [32]
ﬁrst decomposed the broadband signals into non-overlapping
narrowband components and used support vector regression to
obtain the DoA.
The limitations of both existing MB and DD DoA estimation
algorithms in resolving multiple signals that are possibly
broadband and coherent motivate the derivation of a NN-aided
DoA estimator capable of leveraging data to enable MUSIC
to successfully operate in such scenarios.
We introduced deep augmented MUSIC (DA-MUSIC) in [1],
a hybrid MB/DD implementation of MUSIC, which exploits the
structure of the classic subspace algorithm while augmenting
it with NNs to learn to enhance its performance. The proposed
architecture overcomes the fundamental limitations of MUSIC,
enabling it to accurately detect the locations of coherent sources.
Our design builds upon the insight that the sensitivity to model
mismatch and inability to handle coherent and broadband
sources of MUSIC lie in its estimation of the noise and
signal subspaces through an EVD of the empirical covariance
matrix. Accordingly, the proposed DA-MUSIC improves this
crucial step by obtaining a surrogate, pseudo covariance matrix
through a recurrent NN (RNN) from the measurements, which
is learned along with a NN that acts as a peak ﬁnder. This
work presents crucial extensions to DA-MUSIC allowing it
to operate with an unknown and varying number of signal
sources by successfully estimating the number of sources
for non-coherent and coherent signals. An additional neural
augmentation allows the categorization into noise and signal
eigenvectors to be obtained in a learned fashion by training a
classiﬁer. Numerical results show an estimation accuracy of
98% in comparison to MUSIC with 89% accuracy in the same
non-coherent scenario. We further demonstrate DA-MUSIC’s
capabilities in various SNR domains, three different broadband
scenarios, as well as real-world seismic signals. DA-MUSIC
not only manages to focus frequency components but is also
able to concurrently focus an interdependent elevation angle
to receive a stable azimuth estimation.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
describes the assumed system model and surveys some of
the related work of DoA estimation, as well as the technical
details of the MB MUSIC algorithm; Section III introduces
the DA-MUSIC algorithm; Section IV presents the results of
the simulations; and Section V provides concluding remarks.
Throughout the paper, we use boldface lower-case letters for
vectors; e.g., x, and boldface uppercase letters, e.g., for X. The
ith entry of a vector x is denoted by xi and entries separated by
commas represent column vectors. We use calligraphic letters
to denote the discrete-time Fourier transform, e.g., X(ω) is
the frequency representation of a signal x(t). We use (·)⊤
and (·)H to denote the transpose and Hermitian operators
respectively, and ∥·∥and ∥·∥F to denote the ℓ2 and Forbenius
norms respectively. Further, U and CN represent the uniform
and the complex normal distributions. The symbol I denotes
the identity matrix.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we detail the system model for which we de-
velop the proposed DA-MUSIC algorithm in Section III. To that
aim, we ﬁrst discuss the signal model in Subsection II-A. Then,
we formulate the DoA estimation problem in Subsection II-B,
and survey some of the related literature in Subsection II-C.
Since our proposed solution builds upon the MUSIC algorithm,
we recall MUSIC in Subsection II-D and brieﬂy discuss the
CSS method for broadband extension in Subsection II-E.
A. Signal Model
We distinguish the considered signal model into two cases:
the conventional narrowband setting and its more general
broadband setup. For more details regarding the two models,
we refer the reader to the textbooks [10], [33], and [34].
1) Narrowband: The most common setup in the array
signal processing literature concerning DoA estimation is the
narrowband setting. Here, the time it takes for the waves to
propagate the array is assumed to be negligible such that the
occurring delays are sufﬁciently small. Therefore, the signal
measurement model for an arbitrary array structure consisting
of M sensor elements measuring D impinging narrowband
signals takes the following form:
x(t) = A(θ) s(t) + v(t).
(1)
In (1), the measurements x(t) ∈CM at time instance t depend
on the signals s(t) ∈CD, which originate from the unknown
angles θ = [θ1, . . . , θD], while v(t) ∈CM is additive white
Gaussian noise. The matrix A(θ) ∈CM×D contains the
steering vectors {a(θd)}, i.e.,
A(θ) =
a(θ1) . . . a(θD)
,
(2)
where {θd} are the source directions. For example, the steering
vector a(ψ) for a uniform linear array (ULA) with an element
spacing of ∆m = ℓ/2, where ℓis the wavelength of the signals,
is deﬁned for direction ψ as
a(ψ) =

1, e−jπ sin ψ, . . . , e−jπ(M−1) sin ψ
.
(3)
2


===== PAGE 3 =====
…
Noise
subspace
1
aH( ) EN EH
N a( )
EN
P( )
v1:M
{a( )}
…
…
DoA
Estimator
EVD
λmin
multiplicity
Noise
subspace
MUSIC Spectrum
1
aH( ) EN EH
N a( )
Peak
ﬁnder
MUSIC
KX
EN
P( )
ˆD
λ1:M
v1:M
ˆ✓
x(t)
t=1,...,T
ˆN
Input
DoAs
{a( )}
Observations
EVD
λmin
multiplicity
Noise
subspace
MUSIC Spectrum
1
aH( ) EN EH
N a( )
Peak
ﬁnder
MUSIC
KX
EN
P( )
ˆD
λ1:M
v1:M
ˆ✓
x(t)
t=1,...,T
ˆN
Input
DoAs
{a( )}
Fig. 1: DoA estimation illustration.
Consequently, the steering vectors (and, in turn, the matrix
A(θ)) specify the underlying array geometry. The collection
of the measurements at the array elements over multiple time
instances is deﬁned as
X =
x(1) . . . x(T)
,
(4)
where T is referred to as the number of snapshots.
2) Broadband: In practice, many signals are broadband,
and the delay caused by propagating the array aperture needs
to be incorporated into the signal model. The following
notation models the measurements received at array element
m ∈{1, ..., M}
xm(t) =
D
X
d=1
sd(t −τmd) + vm(t),
(5)
where τmd represents the time delay of the mth array element
measuring source d ∈{1, ...., D} compared to the measurement
at the reference element m = 1. Transformed to the frequency
domain, the relationship in (5) at frequency ω becomes
Xm(ω) =
D
X
d=1
e−jωτmd Sd(ω) + Vm(ω),
(6)
which can in turn be written in vector-matrix form analogous
to the narrowband system model (1) as follows:
X(ω) = A(ω, θ) S(ω) + V(ω).
(7)
For a ULA, the broadband steering vectors are deﬁned for
frequency ω and angle of interest ψ as
a(ω, ψ) =

1, e−jω ∆m
c
sin ψ, . . . , e−jω(M−1) ∆m
c
sin ψ
, (8)
where c is the propagation velocity.
B. Problem Formulation
DoA estimation is concerned with localizing signal sources
by determining their angles of incidence utilizing the measure-
ments of an array aperture [33]. Formally, this corresponds to
estimating the angles θ = [θ1, . . . , θD] from the measurements
x(t) = [x1(t), . . . , xM(t)] measured at multiple time instances
t ∈{1, ..., T}. An illustration of such a system is depicted in
Fig. 1. The following additional assumptions are imposed upon
the observation model as well as the derived synthetic data.
The signals are uncorrelated to the noise (though signals may
possibly be correlated with each other) and generated in the far-
ﬁeld region. And there is uniform propagation in all directions
in an isotropic and non-dispersive medium. We further assume
that we have knowledge (though possibly mismatched) of the
underlying array geometry, implying that we can compute an
approximation of a(ψ) or a(ω, ψ). We consider a data-driven
setting where we have access to training data. This data is a set
of U pairs, {(Xu, θu)}U
u=1, each comprising the observations
and DoA angles from where the signals originated. In many
scenarios; e.g., in wireless communications, a speciﬁc training
set can be developed before deployment. If the ground-truth
DoAs are not obtainable at all, the data-driven DoA estimator
must be trained by utilizing synthetic data that closely describes
the real signals. Our goal is thus to leverage the available
domain knowledge and data to design a system for recovering
the DoAs θ from a corresponding observation matrix X whose
columns are T snapshots of the measured waveforms at the
M sensors.
C. Related Literature
We next provide an overview of relevant DoA estimation
methods based on the above problem formulation, motivating
the need for our proposed DA-MUSIC detailed in Section III.
An extensive overview of various MB DoA estimators can
be found in [5], [6], and a recent literature review of DD
DoA estimation approaches can be found in [35]. We thus
only discuss some representative MB methods, followed by
reviewing relevant broadband extensions, and conclude with
DD architectures for narrowband as well as broadband signals.
1) MB Narrowband Estimators: The conventional beam-
former (i.e. maximizing the steered response) is a basic
approach to DoA estimation and an extension of classical
Fourier-based spectral analysis [8]. Various improvements and
alternative beamforming methods have been developed, such
as the minimum variance distortionless response beamformer
[9] and other adaptive beamformers [36]. An overview of
beamforming techniques can be found in [37].
An alternative family of DoA estimators is based on subspace
methods, which aim at recovering the DoAs by identifying
the noise and signal subspaces. The MUSIC algorithm [7]
is a highly popular subspace-based method and has been
researched extensively. Being the focus of this paper, more
information and a detailed description of the algorithm can
be found in Section II-D. Extensions of MUSIC include Root-
MUSIC [38], a polynomial-rooting version, as well as spatially
smoothed MUSIC, which removes the correlation between the
incident signals by dividing the receiver array into overlapping
subarrays [39]. In practice, however, the number of coherent
sources is mostly unknown, and therefore the decorrelation
effect of spatial smoothing is not obvious [40]. Another popular
subspace-based method for DoA estimation is estimation of
signal parameters via rotational invariance techniques (ESPRIT)
[41] and its variations [42]. These methods rely heavily on the
accuracy of the underlying model assumptions, are generally
sensitive to array aperture perturbations, and are inherently
derived for narrowband signals.
2) MB Broadband Estimators: Broadband DoA estimation
algorithms can be categorized into two groups: incoherent
methods and coherent methods. Generally, incoherent methods
3


===== PAGE 4 =====
Empirical
cov.
EVD
λmin
multiplicity
Noise
subspace
MUSIC Spectrum
1
aH(ψ) E ˆ
N EH
ˆ
N a(ψ)
Peak
finder
MUSIC
KX
E ˆ
N
P(ψ)
ˆD
λ1:M
v1:M
ˆθ
x(t)
t=1,...,T
ˆN
Input
DoAs
{a(ψ)}
Fig. 2: Block diagram of the MUSIC algorithm.
use independent frequency bins (IFBs) to process the DoA
information at every frequency separately and then combine the
results of these narrowband DoA estimations. There are many
different variations in the implementation of this approach [43]–
[45], which typically vary in the computation of the covariance
matrices. Unfortunately, the computational complexity increases
with each frequency bin.
Conversely, coherent methods combine the covariance matri-
ces estimated for IFBs in order to apply narrowband techniques
directly over a single, so-called focused covariance matrix. An
overview of coherent techniques can be found in [10], [46].
A leading approach for coherent broadband DoA estimation
is based on the CSS method [11], with example estimators
given in [47]–[49]. Many variations of the CSS method are
concerned with the crucial aspect of the focusing strategy,
proposing different techniques to combine the covariances at
each IFB to obtain a faithful narrowband formulation. See,
for example, [50], [51] and the more recent summary [52].
These methods, however, experience signiﬁcant bias with larger
angular sectors of interest and can impose additional model
assumptions such as noise statistics.
3) DD Estimators: Inspired by the dramatic success of DL
in computer vision and natural language processing, recent
years have witnessed a growing interest in the application of
NNs for DD DoA estimation. A recent review of DL DoA
estimation approaches can be found in [53] and essential
methods were covered in Section I. DL architectures presented
in the numerical evaluations or otherwise closely related to
this work are summarized and discussed below.
The work [18] implemented a CNN architecture for DD DoA
estimation based on a multi-label classiﬁcation task. Particularly,
the method takes real, imaginary, and phase information of
the sample covariance as a three-channel input and predicts a
probability grid of directions. Given the binary cross-entropy
loss for training, the method is capable of operating with a
potentially unknown and varying number of sources. However,
with a growing number of sources, the number of classes grows
exponentially.
Similarly to the above, the methods in [25], [26] propose
CNNs for DoA estimation by taking the same channels of
the sample covariance matrix as input (spatially smoothed
covariance of single snapshot for [26]). However, the CNNs
are trained as a regression task estimating a discretized segment
of the MUSIC spectrum. Thereby, they not only inherit the
drawbacks and imitations of MUSIC but are, besides increased
robustness, dependant on the underlying model assumptions.
The sample covariance matrix estimate deviates from the
actual covariance, especially with multiple possibly coherent
broadband signals which affect MB as well as DD performance.
The work [27] considered systems with subarray sampling and
trained a NN for covariance matrix reconstruction. The method
takes subarray covariance matrices as input and predicts a full
covariance matrix. This NN-aided estimate is then utilized
for DoA recovery with the MUSIC algorithm. While this
approach addresses the fundamental dependency of MUSIC
and other doa estimators on the estimated covariance matrix, it
is still dependent on their subarray estimate, and cannot further
inﬂuence or react to MUSIC’s performance.
The approach presented in [28] proposed a hybrid MB/DD
framework with dense NNs for localization and estimation of
the number of sources. To reduce the mentioned issues of the
sample covariance matrix the framework computes a FTMR
matrix from the measurements. Then an EVD decomposes
it into eigenvalues and eigenvectors which are utilized to
predict the number of sources present and produce a pseudo
MUSIC spectrum, respectively. Trained similarly to [18], the
localization NN input, however, is directly dependent on the
selection of noise eigenvectors which makes this method less
robust to an incorrect estimation of the number of sources.
D. MUSIC Algorithm
As our proposed DA-MUSIC algorithm originates from the
MUSIC algorithm, we next present this method in detail.
MUSIC, originally proposed by Schmidt in [7], considers
the narrowband signal model with incoherent sources (1),
where the signals in s(t) are mutually independent. Fig. 2
visualizes a simple outline of the MUSIC structure as a block
diagram. The approach takes the empirical covariance matrix
of the received measurements X, then conducts an EVD,
followed by categorizing the eigenvectors into signal and noise
subspaces. The orthogonality between the two subspaces allows
the formulation of a spatial spectrum, which contains peaks at
DoA angles.
1) Formal Derivation: With the assumption of the signal
and the noise being uncorrelated, the covariance matrix of x(t)
is given by
KX = A(θ)KSAH(θ) + λK0
X,
(9)
with KS being the covariance of the incident signals s(t).
The matrix A(θ)KSAH(θ) is singular and has a rank of less
4


===== PAGE 5 =====
RNN
EVD
NN
Selection
MUSIC Spectrum
1
aH(ψ) ˜E ˜E
H a(ψ)
NN
Deep Augmented MUSIC
˜K
˜E
P(ψ)
ˆD
λ1:M
v1:M
ˆθ
x(t)
t=1,...,T
ˆN
Input
DoAs
{a(ψ)}
Z−1
Fig. 3: Block diagram of the DA-MUSIC algorithm.
than M when the number of array elements M is strictly
larger than the number of signals D. Therefore, λ is an
eigenvalue of KX (in the metric of K0
X, which takes the form
K0
X = σ2I for additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with
variance σ2). Further, A(θ)KSAH(θ) has to be non-negative
deﬁnite, because A(θ) has full rank and KS is positive deﬁnite,
and consequently, λ in (9) is the minimal eigenvalue of KX,
denoted λmin. The multiplicity of λmin corresponds to the
number of incident wavefronts, and equals N = M −D.
MUSIC builds upon this representation of the covariance
of the signals. The algorithm takes as input T snapshots of
the waveforms at M array elements, represented as X in (4),
and uses them to obtain an empirical estimate of KX via
ˆKX =
1
T XXH. Then, the number of incident signals D is
estimated via
ˆD = M −ˆN,
(10)
where ˆN is the estimated multiplicity of the minimal eigenvalue
of ˆKX. The eigenvectors corresponding to the ˆN smallest
eigenvalues form the noise subspace E ˆ
N, which is orthogonal
to the D dimensional signal subspace spanned by the incident
signal mode vectors. Consequently, MUSIC estimates the DoAs
by computing the spatial spectrum
P(ψ) =
1
aH(ψ)E ˆ
NEH
ˆ
Na(ψ),
(11)
and the ˆD dominant peaks of P(ψ) are set as the estimated
DoA angles ˆθ.
MUSIC is a popular and highly applicable subspace-based
method that is reasonably efﬁcient and statistically consis-
tent [5], [54]. When the signal model is adequately accurate,
it can achieve super-resolution and deliver a highly accurate
estimate of the number of signal sources present. Nevertheless,
the algorithm is sensitive towards the accuracy of the empirical
estimate of KX, and cannot reliably estimate the DoA angles
as well as the number of sources of coherent signals. The
reason for this is that highly correlated signals cause zero
entries within the covariance matrix and can, therefore, become
indistinguishable from noise [55]. Furthermore, the MUSIC
algorithm is inherently a narrowband approach due to the
assumptions imposed on the system model. Nonetheless, it can
be extended to broadband, i.e., signal models as in (7), and so
we next describe the coherent method to achieve this, which
is also adopted in our proposed DA-MUSIC.
E. Coherent Broadband
The main concept behind coherent broadband DoA esti-
mation is to transform the different frequency covariance
matrices into a single covariance matrix at a focusing frequency.
Accordingly, coherent methods ﬁnd appropriate transformations
for each frequency, transform the covariances, and obtain a
focused covariance matrix by some form of averaging. In
particular, the CSS method [11] aims at combining the spatial
signal subspaces to align the signal subspaces associated with
the DoA along all frequency bins. To formulate this, let K(ω)
be the covariance of the frequency domain observations (7),
and divide the spectrum into B IFBs with central frequencies
{ωb}B
b=1. The focused covariance matrix, which is used as the
input covariance for narrowband DoA recovery, is estimated
as
K =
B
X
b=1
αb Tb K(ωb) TH
b ,
(12)
where Tb is the focusing matrix and frequency bins are
prioritized by the weighting αb. The focusing matrices can be
determined by attempting to focus the spectral components at
some frequency ωr and some focusing angles ψ by solving
Tb = arg min
T ∥A(ωr, ψ) −T A(ωb, ψ)∥F.
(13)
Coherent techniques have been shown to achieve a better
estimation accuracy and a smaller computational complexity
as well as a lower resolution threshold than non-coherent
methods [52]. However, the CSS methods require initial values
for the focusing matrix T, the reference frequency ωr, and the
relevant focusing angles ψ to ﬁnd the focusing matrices with
(13), and are typically sensitive towards these initial values.
Additionally, it is not guaranteed that the alignment of the
signal and noise subspaces exists to form a viable general
covariance matrix without disarranging the noise subspace
[51].
III. DEEP AUGMENTED MUSIC
DA-MUSIC is a hybrid MB/DD DoA estimation algorithm
derived from the classic MUSIC algorithm by replacing crucial
and model mismatch sensitive elements of the model-based
structure with speciﬁc NNs. Fig. 3 outlines the resulting
structure of the DA-MUSIC architecture and highlights the
remaining similarities to the original MUSIC algorithm, de-
picted in Fig. 2.
5


===== PAGE 6 =====
GRU
dense
reshape
complex
EVD
selector spectrum
MLP
dense
x(t)
(2 · M, T)
a(ψ)
h
(2 · M)
(2 · M · M)
(2 · M, M)
˜K
(M, M)
(M, M)
EN
(M, N)
P(ψ)
(R)
(2 · M)
(D)
ˆθ
Fig. 4: Detailed network structure of the DA-MUSIC algorithm.
Principally, DA-MUSIC builds upon the understanding
that the core challenges associated with the classic MUSIC
algorithm can be tackled by providing a surrogate covariance
matrix. In particular, as the CSS method provides a surrogate
covariance K that transforms a broadband signal model into
a narrowband one, a similar approach can be employed to
handle coherent sources and array mismatches. Therefore, to
improve the categorization of the noise and signal subspaces,
the correlation of the received measurements is learned from
temporal data by employing a dedicated RNN, which is
augmented into the overall ﬂow of MUSIC. We next elaborate
on the architecture in Subsection III-A, after which we
present the training method in Subsection III-B and provide a
discussion in Subsection III-C.
A. Architecture
The proposed DA-MUSIC algorithm preserves the structure
of the MB MUSIC while replacing certain critical aspects with
NNs. Our neural augmentations aim to improve the crucial
steps of estimating the noise and signal subspaces from the
empirical covariance and the translation of the spatial spectrum
into DoAs via peak ﬁnding. By doing so, DA-MUSIC is not
constrained by the additional model assumptions imposed
in the derivation of MUSIC, and can, as we will show, e.g.
learn to successfully localize coherent signals. To present the
architecture of DA-MUSIC, we commence with the simple
case where the number of sources D is known, and then show
how its estimation is incorporated. Details of the NNs used in
our experimental study are reported in Section IV.
1) Known Number of Sources: Fig. 4 depicts a detailed
outline of the individual elements of the DA-MUSIC architec-
ture. The respective output dimensions of the corresponding
components are given in the bracket notation. First, the input
signal x(t) is transformed into the pseudo covariance matrix
˜K using a RNN implemented through a gated recurrent unit
(GRU). The ﬁnal state of the GRU is passed to a dense layer
enabling a reshaping to the desired dimension of the pseudo
covariance matrix ˜K as well as the subsequent transformation of
the complex space. Then, through the continued use of the EVD,
the algorithm categorizes the subspaces using the eigenvectors.
Inserting the steering vectors a(ψ) allows to compute an
estimate of the spatial spectrum in (11), denoted P(ψ),
identically to MB MUSIC, by using the noise eigenvectors
selected from ˜K.
Next, DA-MUSIC attains the DoAs from the spatial spec-
trum P(ψ) using an additional NN, comprised of a multi-
layer perceptron (MLP) of three fully connected dense layers
followed by a single dense layer with linear activation. The
input to the MLP are R samples of P(ψ) taken uniformly
in [0, 2π). The output of the MLP is the set of estimated
DoA angles ˆθ. The beneﬁts of using a NN-based peak-ﬁnder
compared to a model-based one are two-fold. First, learning the
translation of the pseudo-spectrum into DoAs from data enables
achieving improved resolution compared to conventional peak
ﬁnding, since ˆθd ∈[0, 2π) instead of being dependent on the
number of angles ψ used to evaluate the spectrum. Furthermore,
peak ﬁnding is generally non-differentiable; thus, replacing
it with a NN facilitates training DA-MUSIC end-to-end. The
resulting architecture enables the application of gradient-based
optimization, by propagating through the NNs as well as the
EVD operation, as done in [56]. Doing so allows us to jointly
tune the noise subspace recovery along with the translation of
the MUSIC spectrum into DoAs by comparing its estimated
DoAs with the true DoAs, as we detail in Subsection III-B.
2) Varying Number of Sources: Delivering unbiased esti-
mates of the number of signal sources as well as the ability
to successfully localize these sources makes MUSIC highly
applicable. The above-discussed DA-MUSIC architecture can
be extended to operate with a potentially unknown and varying
number of signal sources, despite the determinant nature of
the NNs. This is achieved by addressing three key aspects of
the algorithm: the estimation of the number of sources; the
selection process of the noise subspace from the eigenvectors;
and the adaptation of the output strategy to overcome the
varying number of DoA angles.
Estimating
number
of
sources: Our design allows
DA-MUSIC to learn abstract mappings as pseudo covariance
features ˜K, which is geared towards end-to-end training and
is not restricted to a natural ordering of the model-based
covariances. Consequently, instead of estimating the number of
sources by inspecting the magnitude of its eigenvalues, we opt
a data-driven approach. We augment the process of estimating
the number of sources with a classiﬁer, implemented through
a MLP, as a classiﬁcation task. Since subspace methods with
M inputs can resolve at most M −1 signals, the classiﬁer
has M −1 classes. Fig. 5 depicts the DA-MUSIC architecture
with an added classiﬁer taking the eigenvalues as an input and
outputting an estimate of the number of sources.
Computing noise subspace: The noise subspace selector
needs to know the number of sources D ∈{1, ..., M −1} to
classify the eigenvectors into signal and noise subspaces; i.e.,
by choosing the eigenvectors corresponding to the N = M −D
smallest eigenvalues. When the number of sources is not known,
we propose to weight each eigenvector by an estimate of it
belonging to the noise subspace. We do this by introducing an
additional neural augmentation, depicted in Fig. 6, which uses
a MLP to cluster the eigenvalues in a learned fashion.
In particular, the MLP maps the estimated M eigenvalues
into a vector q =
q1, ..., qM

whose entries hold the individual
probabilities of choosing the corresponding eigenvector as a
noise eigenvector. The selection is performed by computing
˜E = Vdiag(q) =
q1v1 . . . qMvM

, allowing to learn a
suitable noise subspace. Note that this setting specializes
in the conventional approach of assigning based on the
multiplicity of the minimal eigenvalues; in the conventional
approach, the entries of q are either ones or zeros and ˜E
coincides with the corresponding subspace. Consequently, the
6


===== PAGE 7 =====
GRU
dense
reshape
complex
EVD
selector spectrum
MLP
dense
MLP
dense
x(t)
(2 · M, T)
a(ψ)
h
(2 · M)
(2 · M · M)
(2 · M, M)
˜K
(M, M)
λ
(M)
λ
(M)
(2 · M 2)
(M −1)
ˆD
V
(M, M)
˜E
(M, M)
P(ψ)
(R)
(2 · M)
(M −1)
ˆθ
Fig. 5: DA-MUSIC algorithm with a separately trained (inter-
nal) classiﬁer.
GRU
dense
reshape
complex
EVD
real
MLP
dense
matrix
·
selector spectrum
MLP
dense
MLP
dense
x(t)
(2 · M, T)
a( )
h
(2 · M)
(2 · M · M)
(2 · M, M)
eK
(M, M)
λ
(M)
λ
(M)
(2 · M 2)
(M −1)
ˆD
λ
(M)
V
(M, M)
(2 · M)
(2 · M)
q
(M)
diag(q)
(M, M)
(M, M)
˜E
V
(M, M)
˜E
(M, M)
P( )
(R)
(2 · M)
(M −1)
ˆ✓
selector
Fig. 6: Detailed outline of the DA-MUSIC subspace selection
augmentation.
proposed approach provides additional ﬂexibility in selecting
the noise subspace and facilitates coping with settings where
distinguishing between the eigenvectors is challenging due, for
example, to low SNRs.
Outputting varying number of DoAs: The most common
strategy to overcome the dynamic output dimensions of NNs is
to scale the output dimension to the maximum occurring value.
In our case, since MUSIC cannot resolve more than M −1
sources, the dimension of the last dense layer of DA-MUSIC
is set to M −1. The only additional modiﬁcation required with
this strategy compared with known D is the slight alteration
to the loss function discussed in Subsection III-B below. An
advantage of this strategy is that the approach allows to extract
up to M −1 DoA, where θ1 is most likely a true DoA angle,
θ2 has a slightly lower probability to be a DoA angle, etc. The
ﬁnal estimation is thus carried out by ﬁrst taking ˆD from the
module that estimates the number of sources, and then using
the ﬁrst ˆD outputs as the recovered DoAs.
B. Training Procedure
DA-MUSIC is trained end-to-end in a supervised setting as
a multiple regression problem. As detailed in Subsection II-B,
the training set is comprised of U tuples of sequences of
measurements and their corresponding DoAs; i.e., the uth tuples
includes the Tu measurements Xu and their corresponding Du
DoA angles θu. We ﬁrst describe how this data is used for
training when D is known and ﬁxed; i.e., Du ≡D. This acts
as a preliminary step for discussing how the training procedure
is carried out in the general case where the model does not
have knowledge D.
1) Known Number of Sources: Given a sequence of mea-
surements X as input, the model predicts the estimated DoA
angles ˆθ that are compared to the true DoA angles θ. Gradient-
based optimization is possible because every element of the
architecture is differentiable, allowing backpropagation through
the complete structure. Derived from the root mean squared
periodic error (RMSPE) [57], [58] the following loss function
additionally compares all permutations of the predicted angles
with the true angles to capture all possible assignments of
the estimated DoA to the true DoA. Thereby the minimal
permutation RMSPE includes the permutation invariance of
the DoAs and is obtained as:
RMSPE(θ, ˆθ) = min
P∈PD
 1
D
modβ(θ −Pˆθ)

2 1
2
,
(14)
where PD is the set of all D × D permutations and modβ
denotes the element-wise modulus operation regarding the
angle range of interest, e.g. β = π for ψ ∈[−π/2, π/2) or
β = 2π for ψ ∈[0, 2π).
2) Unknown Number of Sources: As discussed in the
previous subsection, DA-MUSIC is designed to resolve a
varying and unknown number of sources by introducing an
additional NN classiﬁer for the number of sources. To formulate
the training procedure of the overall system, we use wc to
denote the trainable parameters of the classiﬁer, while wd
represents the parameters of the remaining trainable modules
of DA-MUSIC (covariance estimator, peak ﬁnder, and subspace
selector). The loss used to train wd is the RMSPE loss of (14),
which is altered during training to account for varying sources
by computing,
LRMSPE
θu, ˆθ(Xu)

= RMSPE
θ1:Du, ˆθ1:Du(Xu)

.
(15)
In (15), ˆθ(Xu) denotes the M −1 outputs of DA-MUSIC
applied to Xu, while θ1:Du = (θ1, ..., θDu). This means that
only the ﬁrst Du angles of the estimated DoA ˆθ are compared
with the true DoA θ while the remaining angles of ˆθ are
completely ignored.
The separate classiﬁer is trained using the categorical cross-
entropy of the classes as a loss function ensuring optimal
training. In particular, letting λu be the input to the MLP
classiﬁer when applying DA-MUSIC to Xu and letting ˆ
D(λu)
be the softmax output of the MLP applied to λu (with ˆDi(λu)
being its ith entry), the loss used for training wc is given by
LCE
Du, ˆ
D(λu)

= −log ˆDDu(λu).
(16)
It is noted that since (16) is used for training wc, then one
should block the gradient during backpropagation from passing
from the classiﬁer to the EVD, as indicated by the dashed
connections in Fig. 5. This ensures that the MLP learns from the
eigenvalues themselves and not by inﬂuencing and disrupting
the GRU. Further, the regressor is completely independent
of the classiﬁer, which allows DA-MUSIC to operate with
different classiﬁers if needed or with any other desired scheme
delivering an estimate of D. The resulting training procedure
(employing mini-batch gradient descent with ADAM [59]) is
summarized as Algorithm 1.
C. Discussion
The design of the architecture of DA-MUSIC is derived from
the model-based MUSIC structure. This allows for exploiting
the successful aspects of the algorithm while improving
7


===== PAGE 8 =====
Algorithm 1: Training DA-MUSIC
Data: Data set {(Xu, θu)}U
u=1, learning rate µ = 0.001,
decay rates b1 = 0.9, b2 = 0.999, ϵ = 10−8
1 Initialize weights wd, wc;
2 Initialize moment vectors νd, υd, νc, υc;
3 for epoch = 1, 2, . . . do
4
for each batch do
5
Apply DA-MUSIC to {Xu} for u ∈batch;
6
Compute gradients gd via
gd ←∇wd
P
u∈batch
LRMSPE(θu, ˆθ(Xu));
7
Compute gradients gc via
gc ←∇wc
P
u∈batch
LCE(Du, ˆ
D(λu));
8
Update biased ﬁrst moment via
9
νd ←b1νd + (1 −b1)gd;
10
νc ←b1νc + (1 −b1)gc;
11
Update biased second raw moment via
12
υd ←b2νd + (1 −b2)g2
d;
13
υc ←b2νc + (1 −b2)g2
c;
14
Compute bias corrected moments ˆνd, ˆνc, ˆυd, ˆυc;
15
Update wd via wd ←wd −µ ˆνd/(
√ˆυd + ϵ);
16
Update wc via wc ←wc −µ ˆνc/(
√ˆυc + ϵ);
17
end
18 end
certain critical elements and alleviating important drawbacks.
Replacing the empirical covariance estimation with a RNN
is the key neural augmentation of DA-MUSIC, enabling the
system to learn the pseudo covariance from the measurements
themselves such that the resulting surrogate model facilitates
subspace-based DoA recovery. Thereby, the performance of
DA-MUSIC, for example, is not affected by coherent signals
and other related issues discussed in Subsection II-D. Further-
more, learning end-to-end allows DA-MUSIC to operate with
broadband signals, as it effectively learns to produce a focused
pseudo covariance, similarly to the CSS methods discussed in
Subsection II-C. It is noted that our augmentation approach
depends on the array geometry, as the steering vectors a(·)
are used for computing the MUSIC spectrum. Nonetheless, as
we numerically demonstrate in Section IV, DA-MUSIC learns
to overcome mismatches in the array geometry from the data
without any alterations or renewed training.
Speciﬁcally, the RNN utilized by DA-MUSIC is able to learn
an appropriate focusing matrix while concurrently correlating
the measurements comparably to (12). The usage of a RNN
applied to the time-domain signal and only passing the last state
to the next layer allows DA-MUSIC to operate with different
signal durations and possibly cope in real-time with dynamic
variations in the DoAs, though investigation of the latter is left
for future work. Our experiments indicate that a deeper RNN
aids the correlation aspect while a wider RNN allows a more
complicated mapping with this correlation.
Another important component of the architecture of
DA-MUSIC is its incorporation of the EVD as a means for
division into subspaces. Though computationally expensive, the
internal EVD allows DA-MUSIC to not only classify signal
and noise subspaces with the eigenvalues, but also signiﬁcantly
simpliﬁes the estimation of the number of signal sources
present.
To enable training end-to-end from the errors in (14), a
TABLE I: Simulation parameters.
Parameter Description
Notation
Default Value
Array geometry
ULA
Number of array elements
M
8
Element spacing
∆m
ℓmin/2
SNR
10 dB
Snapshots
T
200
Grid points of continuum
R
360
Min. frequency
fmin
0 [Hz]
Max. frequency
fmax
999 [Hz]
Sampling frequency
fs
2(fmax + 1)
Time length
Tsamp
1 s
Fast Fourier transform (FFT) points
Nf
Tsamp · fs
NN-based peak ﬁnder is used in form of a MLP. Model-based
peak-ﬁnding is generally non-differentiable; therefore, replacing
it with a NN enables gradient-based optimization through the
entire DA-MUSIC structure. Furthermore, improved resolution
can be achieved by extracting the DoA from the spatial
spectrum in a learned manner (i.e., ˆθd ∈[0, 2π) and it is
not dependent on the number of angles ψ used to evaluate the
spectrum P(ψ)).
IV. NUMERICAL EVALUATIONS
In this section, we present our numerical evaluations of the
proposed DA-MUSIC algorithm1 Our experimental study is
comprised of evaluations in a narrowband synthetic setting
(Subsection IV-A); a broad synthetic setup (Subsection IV-B);
and experiments with real-world data corresponding to azimuth
estimation in seismic arrays (Subsection IV-C).
A. Synthetic Narrowband
The numerical evaluations of synthetic data presented below
are obtained by simulating the measurements x(t) according
to the narrowband system model (1). In particular, we simulate
a ULA with M = 8 array elements that measure impinging
waveforms originating from the DoA angles θ = [θ1, . . . , θD],
which are separately drawn from the uniform distribution
U(−π/2, π/2). The signals s(t) = [s1(t) . . . sD(t)]⊤are
each drawn randomly from the complex Gaussian distribution
CN(0, 1) for all t modeling random amplitudes and phases.
The noises measured at the M array elements v(t)
=
[v1(t) . . . vM(t)]⊤are also drawn from CN(0, 1) for all t,
followed by appropriate scaling to meet the constant SNR.
In the coherent cases, all signals have identical amplitudes
and phases, and when not stated otherwise, the simulation
parameters are set according to Table I.
1) Known Number of Sources: We ﬁrst evaluate the RMSPE
in [rad] achieved when the number of sources D is known in
the synthetic narrowband scenario described above. The results,
reported in Table II, compare the performance of the following
DoA estimators for a different number of sources D:
• The DA-MUSIC architecture is implemented according
to Fig. 3 and trained separately for each case D.
• The classic MB MUSIC algorithm, implemented as
described in Section II-D, utilizes the external knowledge
of D.
1The source code used in our experiments can be found at https://github.
com/DA-MUSIC/TVT23.
8


===== PAGE 9 =====
Fig. 7: DoA estimation of D = 2 closely spaced sources.
Fig. 8: DoA estimation with mismatch in the array geometry
for D = 5 sources.
• The CNN architecture of [18], with a reduced stride in
the ﬁrst layer to account for M = 8, and an increased
grid-size for the last layer to achieve R = 360.
• The DD DeepMUSIC proposed in [25], while incorporat-
ing minor alterations that were necessary to accommodate
for the difference in the setup, includes tuning of individual
hyperparameters to assure successful training of the CNNs.
The above algorithms are compared with a random guessing of
the DoA angles. The results in Table II show that the proposed
DA-MUSIC notably outperforms all considered benchmarks,
notably surpassing the MB MUSIC algorithm not only for
coherent sources, but also for non-coherent ones, which is the
scenario for which the MB algorithm is designed.
TABLE II: RMSPE of different DoA estimation algorithms
with constant and known D for T = 200 snapshots.
RMSPE
[rad]
DA-MUSIC
CNN
Deep-
MUSIC
Classic
MUSIC
Random
non-coherent
D = 2
0.0117
0.0237
0.0329
0.0336
0.6809
D = 3
0.0315
0.0464
0.1600
0.0841
0.6034
D = 4
0.0563
0.0841
0.2656
0.1459
0.5421
D = 5
0.0751
0.1319
0.2701
0.2008
0.4963
coherent
D = 2
0.0140
0.0274
0.5781
0.2350
0.6854
D = 3
0.0407
0.0528
0.4023
0.4819
0.6060
D = 4
0.0519
0.0859
0.2915
0.4522
0.5407
D = 5
0.0658
0.1254
0.3054
0.4401
0.5000
Fig. 9: DoA estimation of D = 5 signals with different SNRs.
Fig. 10: DoA estimation of D = 5 signals with different
number of snapshots T.
To compare the resolution of the algorithms, Fig. 7 shows
the RMSPE for localizing D = 2 non-coherent signals, which
are located close together at a ∆θ distance from each other. The
MB MUSIC algorithm is shown to collapse when the angular
difference approaches ∆θ ≈0.1 radians, while DA-MUSIC
demonstrates a constant low error for all ∆θ, indicating its
improved resolution.
Next, we evaluate DA-MUSIC in the presence of a mismatch
in the array geometry. Fig. 8 depicts the RMSPE achieved
when each element of the steering vector a(·) is corrupted
with zero-mean Gaussian noise, leading to a mismatch from
the values used to compute the spatial spectrum. Indicating
improved robustness, DA-MUSIC is shown to overcome such
mismatches in the array geometry from the data. The CNN,
TABLE III: RMSPE of different DoA estimation algorithms
with varying and unknown D for T = 200 snapshots.
RMSPE
[rad]
DA-MUSIC
CNN
Classic
MUSIC
Beamformer
Random
non-coherent
D = 2
0.0430
0.0403
0.0428
0.1900
0.8318
D = 3
0.0705
0.0842
0.0917
0.2906
0.6981
D = 4
0.0894
0.1463
0.1489
0.3757
0.6021
D = 5
0.1222
0.1847
0.1856
0.4029
0.5357
coherent
D = 2
0.0383
0.0376
0.6139
0.1670
0.8243
D = 3
0.0688
0.0729
0.5743
0.2843
0.6962
D = 4
0.0869
0.1181
0.5258
0.3883
0.6051
D = 5
0.1046
0.1652
0.4744
0.4179
0.5435
9


===== PAGE 10 =====
Fig. 11: Accuracy of estimating
ˆD for various T with
D ∈{2, ..., 5} non-coherent signals.
Fig. 12: Accuracy of estimating
ˆD for various T with
D ∈{2, ..., 5} coherent signals.
deepMUSIC, and the Random algorithm remain unaffected as
they are independent of a(·).
Fig.9 depicts the performances differences when localizing
D = 5 non-coherent signals with T
= 200 snapshots
available for different SNRlevels in the range of [−20, 20]
dB. DA-MUSIC shows a constant low SNRfor positive dB
settings and without any ﬂuctuations which slowly decreases
with increasing SNR.
We conclude the evaluation of DA-MUSIC with a known
number of sources by considering the case in which the
number of available snapshots T is varied. Fig. 10 depicts the
performance degradation of the estimators with fewer snapshots
available. The DD estimators are only trained for the case
T = 200 as indicated by the circle around the T = 200
marker, yet manage to operate with shorter sequences during
inference due to the recurrent unit or by taking the covariance
matrix as input.
2) Unknown and Varying Number of Sources: Table III
shows the results obtained in the exact same narrowband
scenario introduced in Section IV-A above but with an
unknown and varying number of sources D ∈{2, ..., 5}. Here,
during inference, the DoA estimation algorithms do not have
any knowledge of the varying number of sources present.
To compute the RMSPE in such settings (i.e., if the DoA
estimators output the wrong number of sources ˆD), the DoA are
either truncated (least dominant peaks for the MB algorithms
and the CNN and highest indexed DoA angles for DA-MUSIC)
Fig. 13: RMSPE for varying and unknown number of
D ∈{2, ..., 5} non-coherent signals.
Fig. 14: RMSPE for varying and unknown number of
D ∈{2, ..., 5} coherent signals.
or padded with random DoA angels until |ˆθ| = |θ| = D. We
compare the following DoA estimators:
• The DA-MUSIC architecture is implemented according
to Fig. 5 with the classiﬁer which predicts the number
of sources being trained along with the overall DoA
estimation method.
• The DA-MUSIC (RTC) variation is also implemented
according to Fig. 5, yet with a retroactively trained
classiﬁer (RTC), i.e., we ﬁrst train DA-MUSIC for a
speciﬁc scenario, and then we ﬁx the DoA estimator
modules and train only the classiﬁcation network for
alternate scenarios.
• The Classic MUSIC algorithm is implemented as before
but determines the number of sources by estimating the
multiplicity of the smallest eigenvalue utilizing a pre-
determined threshold.
• The CNN of [18] as introduced above.
• A conventional beamformer [8], utilizing a peak-ﬁnder
to estimate the number of sources by determining the
number of dominant peaks.
• The Random algorithm corresponds to the base perfor-
mance when choosing DoA angles at random.
Figs. 11 and 12 show the accuracy in identifying the number
of sources versus the number of snapshots T obtained by
the mentioned algorithms during the estimation of ˆD for
non-coherent and coherent signals, respectively. Again, the
DD estimators are only trained for the case T = 200 as
10


===== PAGE 11 =====
TABLE IV: Simulation parameters of the broadband scenarios.
Parameter Description
Notation
Value
Scenario 1
Modulation frequency
fc,d
0 −999 [Hz]
Scenario 2
Number of subcarriers
K
1000
Signal bandwidth
∆fd
1000 [Hz]
Scenario 3
Modulation frequency
fc,d
0 −899 [Hz]
Number of subcarriers
K
10
Signal bandwidth
∆fd
100 [Hz]
indicated by the circle. Unfortunately, the performance of the
internal classiﬁer of DA-MUSIC is dependent on the number of
snapshots, and to be able to maintain a more constant accuracy
it must be trained for each case. Consequently, DA-MUSIC
(RTC), which trains its classiﬁer retroactively, requires separate
training for each number of snapshots, yet manages to achieve
the most accurate predictions.
The corresponding performances in localizing the varying
number of sources are depicted in Figs. 13 and 14 for
non-coherent and coherent signals, respectively. The shown
RMSPE is an average over all considered D ∈{2, ..., 5}. The
fundamental limitation of the MB MUSIC structure to estimate
the number of signal sources for coherent signals also severely
impacts the localization abilities of the algorithm.
B. Synthetic Broadband
We proceed to evaluate DA-MUSIC in a broadband setting.
The previously introduced synthetic environment requires
certain alterations and assumptions to account for broadband
signals. The sensor elements of the receiving array are ade-
quately spaced, and the element spacing is therefore assumed
to be
∆m = ℓmin
2
= 1
2
c
fmax
,
(17)
where ℓmin is the minimal wavelength corresponding to
the maximal occurring frequency fmax and the frequency
spectrum of interest is considered to be within [fmin, fmax].
The measurements are simulated utilizing the broadband system
model (7), where the elements of S(ω) and W(ω) are the Nf-
point FFTs of the elements of s(t) and w(t). The parameter
values of the different broadband scenarios are speciﬁed in
Table IV if not speciﬁed otherwise. We simulate the following
DoA estimators:
• The DA-MUSIC architecture is implemented according
to Fig. 3, but the GRU parameters are scaled (having
10 times more parameters available) to enable optimal
learning despite the more complex broadband scenarios.
• The classic MUSIC algorithm is implemented in its
narrowband format as described in Section II-D and
utilizes steering vectors calibrated to the exact array
element spacing using ℓmin/2.
• Broadband MUSIC corresponds to an incoherent broad-
band extension of MUSIC [46] and is implemented using
10 [Hz] per IFB; i.e., |ωb −ωb−1| = 10 [Hz] for all
b ∈{1, ..., B}.
• The DoA estimators are again compared to choosing DoA
angles at random.
We consider the following three different signal models of the
broadband signals sd(t) for d ∈{1, ..., D}:
Fig. 15: RMSPE for known number of D = 2 signals from
Broadband Scenario 1.
Fig. 16: RMSPE for known number of D = 2 signals from
Broadband Scenario 2.
Fig. 17: RMSPE for known number of D = 2 signals from
Broadband Scenario 3.
1) Broadband Scenario 1: A broadband signal is obtained as
narrowband signals modulated on different carrier frequencies,
i.e.,
sd(t) = ¯sd exp (2πjfc,dt),
(18)
where for each d ∈{1, ..., D}, both ¯sd and fc,d are randomly
drawn from CN(0, 1) and U(fmin, fmax) respectively.
2) Broadband Scenario 2: Broadband signals are obtained
via orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) [60],
which are modulated on the same carrier frequency. The signals
are considered in baseband and take the following form
sd,OFDM = 1
K
K−1
X
k=0
¯sk exp (2πjk∆fdt/K),
(19)
11


===== PAGE 12 =====
where ¯sk ∼CN(0, 1) is randomly drawn for each of the K
subcarriers and the bandwidth is ∆fd = fmax −fmin.
3) Broadband Scenario 3: A combination of the two
previous scenarios and consists of OFDM signals modulated
on different carrier frequencies
sd(t) = exp (2πjfc,dt) sd,OFDM,
(20)
where fc,d is drawn randomly from U(fmin, fmax −∆fd) to
account for the signal bandwidth ∆fd.
Results: Figs. 15, 16, and 17 present the RMSPE obtained
when localizing D = 2 broadband signals from Broadband
Scenario 1, 2, and 3 respectively. The number of snapshots
goes as high as the sampling frequency fs = 2000 [Hz] and is
given logarithmically. This high number is suitable for the MB
broadband MUSIC algorithm to achieve reliable transformation
from the time domain to the frequency domain. DA-MUSIC
is again only trained for the case T = 200, as indicated by a
circle around the marker, yet manages to perform similarly well
with a higher number of snapshots. As expected, the classic
narrowband MUSIC algorithm completely fails to operate
with these broadband signals, while DA-MUSIC consistently
achieves the most accurate estimates, outperforming the MB
broadband MUSIC algorithm, except for Broadband Scenario
3 with a very large number of snapshots T > 103, where
DA-MUSIC trained with much shorter sequences is slightly
outperformed by the MB estimator. These results demonstrate
the suitability of DA-MUSIC for coping with broadband
scenarios with a limited number of observations.
Figs. 18, 19, and 20 analyze the performances with differently
sized frequency ranges [fmin, fmax]. It is noted that the
architecture of DA-MUSIC is almost invariant towards such
scalings and manages to handle signals during inference with
much larger bandwidths or modulated with higher carrier
frequencies than the signals of the training data. Speciﬁcally,
DA-MUSIC is only trained for signals with carrier frequencies
and bandwidths within 0 to 1000 [Hz] as indicated by the
circle around the marker. The results in Figs. 18-20 show that
DA-MUSIC, whose complexity is ﬁxed, learns to achieve the
most accurate estimates, outperforming the MB broadband
MUSIC; the latter requires an increase of the number of IFBs
to overcome a larger frequency range and has a constant 10 [Hz]
per bin in the depicted results leading to a severe increase in
computational complexity.
C. Non-Synthetic Data: Azimuth Estimation in Seismic Arrays
In this section, we demonstrate the feasibility and the perfor-
mance of DA-MUSIC in processing non-synthetic seismic data.
The seismic data was recorded by the German Experimental
Seismic System (GERES) array located in the Bavarian Forest,
Germany. GERES is part of the Comprehensive nuclear-Test
Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) international monitoring
system, and is a well-maintained and calibrated station. Data
from GERES is continuously streamed to the International Data
Centre (IDC) of the CTBTO, where it is analyzed. The array is
composed of 25 vertical seismometers with a minimal distance
between the sites of 124 [m] and an aperture of approximately
2.13 [km]. The seismic signal at each sensor is sampled at
Fig. 18: RMSPE of varying frequency range for the carrier
frequencies of Broadband Scenario 1 signals.
Fig. 19: RMSPE of varying frequency range for the bandwidth
of Broadband Scenario 2 signals.
Fig. 20: RMSPE of varying frequency range for the carrier
frequencies of Broadband Scenario 3 signals.
40 [Hz]. Details about the GERES arrays and the exact array
conﬁguration can be found in [61].
We use data from October to December 2021, in which
GERES detected arrivals for 2904 events of which 2816 were
used during this analysis, 2534 for training, and 282 for testing.
We employ sliding windows of length 100 seconds with a shift
of 25 seconds around the signal arrival time as designated by
the IDC analysis. The following parameters for each event are
obtained from the IDC’s Reviewed Event Bulletin: the azimuth
DoA angle θ, the slowness value u, and the sensor positions
r1, ..., rM. Using these parameters, the steering vectors take
the following form:
a(f, u, ψ, α)=

e−j2πfur1k(ψ,α), . . . , e−j2πfurMk(ψ,α)
,
12


===== PAGE 13 =====
TABLE V: RMSPE in [rad] of different DoA estimation
algorithms for seismic data.
DA-MUSIC
Broadband
MUSIC
Classic
MUSIC
Beam-
former
Random
RMSPE
0.6269
1.0075
1.2475
0.9383
1.7097
for some frequency f and with the wave vector for certain
elevation α and azimuth ψ of interest,
k(ψ, α) = [sin α cos ψ, sin α sin ψ, cos α].
We compare DA-MUSIC with following DoA estimators for
the setting settings α = −π/4 and f = 1 [Hz]:
• Broadband MUSIC, corresponding to an incoherent broad-
band extension of MUSIC [46], and instead of using the
constant f = 1 [Hz] it utilizes 10 IFB with frequencies in
[0, 20] [Hz].
• The classic MUSIC algorithm, implemented in its narrow-
band format as described in Section II-D with additionally
ﬁltering the measurements with an experimentally cali-
brated low-pass ﬁlter, allowing only frequencies within
[0, 10] [Hz] to pass.
• A conventional beamformer [8].
• Choosing a DoA angle at random.
The results, reported in Table V, show that DA-MUSIC
manages to outperform the MB estimators by not only focusing
the frequency component, but also by concurrently focusing
the interdependent elevation angle to receive a stable azimuth
estimation. On the other hand, the MB algorithms require
further knowledge of the elevation and frequency at hand to
operate reliably. While the errors in Table V may appear to be
relatively large, it is noted that the average error achieved via
expert analysis reported by the IDC Reviewed Event Bulletin
is 0.4243 [rad]. This indicates the ability of DA-MUSIC to
achieve comparable results and to notably outperform the MB
estimators while operating with simpliﬁed and approximated
model parameters.
V. CONCLUSIONS
We presented a hybrid MB/DD implementation of the
MUSIC
algorithm
for
DoA
estimation.
The
proposed
DA-MUSIC was shown to mitigate some of the limitations and
drawbacks of the classic method. DA-MUSIC is operable with
an unknown number of sources and with broadband signals
while being adaptable to various scenarios and robust towards
severe mismatches in the array geometry. The proposed hybrid
MB/DD approach provides a viable alternative in both low
and high snapshot domains and shows a remarkable resolution
capability compared to both MB and DD benchmarks in various
settings.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Dr. Yochai Ben Horin for constructive and valuable
joint discussions on the seismic data, and for providing the
data.
REFERENCES
[1] J. P. Merkofer, G. Revach, N. Shlezinger, and R. J. G. van Sloun, “Deep
augmented music algorithm for data-driven DoA estimation,” in IEEE
Internatioal Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2022, pp. 3598–3602.
[2] I. Bilik, O. Longman, S. Villeval, and J. Tabrikian, “The rise of radar
for autonomous vehicles: Signal processing solutions and future research
directions,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 20–31, 2019.
[3] D. Rahamim, J. Tabrikian, and R. Shavit, “Source localization using
vector sensor array in a multipath environment,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 3096–3103, 2004.
[4] J. Foutz, A. Spanias, and M. K. Banavar, “Narrowband direction of
arrival estimation for antenna arrays,” Synthesis Lectures on Antennas,
vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–76, 2008.
[5] H. Krim and M. Viberg, “Two decades of array signal processing research:
the parametric approach,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 13, no. 4, pp.
67–94, 1996.
[6] Z. Ahmad and I. Ali, “Three decades of development in DoA estimation
technology,” Indonesian Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, vol. 12, pp. 6297–6312, 2014.
[7] R. Schmidt, “Multiple emitter location and signal parameter estimation,”
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 276–280, 1986.
[8] M. S. Bartlett, “Smoothing periodograms from time-series with continu-
ous spectra,” Nature, vol. 161, no. 4096, pp. 686–687, May 1948.
[9] J. Capon, “High-resolution frequency-wavenumber spectrum analysis,”
Proc. IEEE, vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 1408–1418, 1969.
[10] T. E. Tuncer, T. K. Yasar, and B. Friedlander, “Chapter 4 - narrowband
and wideband DoA estimation for uniform and nonuniform linear arrays,”
in Classical and Modern Direction-of-Arrival Estimation.
Boston:
Academic Press, 2009, pp. 125–160.
[11] H. Wang and M. Kaveh, “Coherent signal-subspace processing for the
detection and estimation of angles of arrival of multiple wide-band
sources,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., vol. 33, no. 4,
pp. 823–831, 1985.
[12] G. Su and M. Morf, “The signal subspace approach for multiple wide-
band emitter location,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process.,
vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1502–1522, 1983.
[13] P.-A. Grumiaux, S. Kiti´c, L. Girin, and A. Gu´erin, “A survey of sound
source localization with deep learning methods,” The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, vol. 152, no. 1, pp. 107–151, 2022.
[14] S. Chakrabarty and E. A. Habets, “Multi-speaker DoA estimation using
deep convolutional networks trained with noise signals,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Signal Process., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 8–21, 2019.
[15] Z.-M. Liu, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “Direction-of-arrival estimation
based on deep neural networks with robustness to array imperfections,”
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 7315–7327, 2018.
[16] L. li Wu, Z. Liu, and Z. Huang, “Deep convolution network for direction
of arrival estimation with sparse prior,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett.,
vol. 26, pp. 1688–1692, 2019.
[17] H. Hammer, S. E. Chazan, J. Goldberger, and S. Gannot, “Dynamically
localizing multiple speakers based on the time-frequency domain,”
EURASIP Journal on Audio, Speech, and Music Processing, vol. 2021,
no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2021.
[18] G. K. Papageorgiou, M. Sellathurai, and Y. C. Eldar, “Deep networks for
direction-of-arrival estimation in low SNR,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 69, pp. 3714–3729, 2020.
[19] A. Barthelme and W. Utschick, “A machine learning approach to DoA
estimation and model order selection for antenna arrays with subarray
sampling,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 69, pp. 3075–3087, 2020.
[20] D. Hu, Y. Zhang, L. He, and J. Wu, “Low-complexity deep-learning-
based DOA estimation for hybrid massive MIMO systems with uniform
circular arrays,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 9, pp. 83–86, 2020.
[21] M. L. L. de Oliveira and M. Bekooij, “Deep-MLE: Fusion between a
neural network and MLE for a single snapshot DOA estimation,” IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), pp. 3673–3677, 2022.
[22] ——, “Resnet applied for a single-snapshot DOA estimation,” IEEE
Radar Conference (RadarConf22), 2022.
[23] N. Shlezinger, J. Whang, Y. C. Eldar, and A. G. Dimakis, “Model-based
deep learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.08405, 2020.
[24] N. Shlezinger, Y. C. Eldar, and S. P. Boyd, “Model-based deep learning:
On the intersection of deep learning and optimization,” IEEE Access,
2022.
[25] A. M. Elbir, “DeepMUSIC: Multiple signal classiﬁcation via deep
learning,” IEEE Sensors Letters, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 1–4, 2020.
13


===== PAGE 14 =====
[26] C. Liu, W. Feng, H. Li, and H. Zhu, “Single snapshot DOA estimation
based on spatial smoothing MUSIC and CNN,” IEEE International
Conference on Signal Processing, Communications and Computing
(ICSPCC), 2021.
[27] A. Barthelme and W. Utschick, “DoA estimation using neural network-
based covariance matrix reconstruction,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett.,
vol. 28, pp. 783–787, 2021.
[28] D. T. Hoang and K. Lee, “Deep learning-aided coherent direction-of-
arrival estimation with the ftmr algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 70, pp. 1118–1130, 2022.
[29] W. Zhang, Y. Han, M. Jin, and X. Qiao, “Multiple-toeplitz matrices
reconstruction algorithm for doa estimation of coherent signals,” IEEE
Access, vol. 7, pp. 49 504–49 512, 2019.
[30] S. Chakrabarty and E. A. Habets, “Broadband DoA estimation using
convolutional neural networks trained with noise signals,” in Workshop
on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA),
2017, pp. 136–140.
[31] W. Zhu and M. Zhang, “A deep learning architecture for broadband DoA
estimation,” in International Conference on Communication Technology
(ICCT), 2019, pp. 244–247.
[32] L. li Wu and Z. Huang, “Coherent SVR learning for wideband direction-
of-arrival estimation,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 26, pp. 642–646,
2019.
[33] B. Friedlander, “Chapter 1 - wireless direction-ﬁnding fundamentals,” in
Classical and Modern Direction-of-Arrival Estimation, T. E. Tuncer and
B. Friedlander, Eds.
Boston: Academic Press, 2009, pp. 1–51.
[34] Z. Chen, G. Gokeda, and Y. Yu, Introduction to Direction-of-arrival
Estimation.
Artech House, 2010.
[35] S. Ge, K. Li, and S. N. M. Rum, “Deep learning approach in DoA
estimation: A systematic literature review,” Mob. Inf. Syst., vol. 2021,
pp. 6 392 875:1–6 392 875:14, 2021.
[36] O. Frost, “An algorithm for linearly constrained adaptive array processing,”
Proc. IEEE, vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 926–935, 1972.
[37] B. Van Veen and K. Buckley, “Beamforming: a versatile approach to
spatial ﬁltering,” IEEE ASSP Mag., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 4–24, 1988.
[38] B. Friedlander, “The root-music algorithm for direction ﬁnding with
interpolated arrays,” Signal Processing, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 15–29, 1993.
[39] Tie-Jun Shan, M. Wax, and T. Kailath, “On spatial smoothing for
direction-of-arrival estimation of coherent signals,” IEEE Trans. Acoust.,
Speech, Signal Process., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 806–811, 1985.
[40] Qing Chen and Ruolun Liu, “On the explanation of spatial smoothing
in music algorithm for coherent sources,” in International Conference
on Information Science and Technology, 2011, pp. 699–702.
[41] A. Paulraj, R. Roy, and T. Kailath, “Estimation of signal parameters
via rotational invariance techniques- esprit,” in Nineteeth Asilomar
Conference on Circuits, Systems and Computers, 1985., 1985, pp. 83–89.
[42] V. Vasylyshyn, “Direction of arrival estimation using esprit with sparse
arrays,” in European Radar Conference (EuRAD), 2009, pp. 246–249.
[43] M. Wax, T.-J. Shan, and T. Kailath, “Spatio-temporal spectral analysis by
eigenstructure methods,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process.,
vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 817–827, 1984.
[44] S. Chandran and M. Ibrahim, “DoA estimation of wide-band signals
based on time-frequency analysis,” IEEE J. Ocean. Eng., vol. 24, no. 1,
pp. 116–121, 1999.
[45] S. Argentieri and P. Danes, “Broadband variations of the music high-
resolution method for sound source localization in robotics,” in 2007
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
2007, pp. 2009–2014.
[46] Y.-S. Yoon, L. M. Kaplan, and J. H. McClellan, “DoA estimation of
wideband signals,” Advances in Direction-of-Arrival Estimation, 2006.
[47] J. Krolik and D. Swingler, “Focused wide-band array processing by spatial
resampling,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., vol. 38, no. 2,
pp. 356–360, 1990.
[48] T.-S. Lee, “Efﬁcient wideband source localization using beamforming
invariance technique,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 42, no. 6, pp.
1376–1387, 1994.
[49] B. Friedlander and A. Weiss, “Direction ﬁnding for wideband signals
using an interpolated array,” in Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems,
and Computers, vol. 1, 1991, pp. 583–587.
[50] E. di Claudio and R. Parisi, “WAVES: weighted average of signal
subspaces for robust wideband direction ﬁnding,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 2179–2191, 2001.
[51] Y.-S. Yoon, L. Kaplan, and J. McClellan, “TOPS: new DOA estimator
for wideband signals,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54, no. 6, pp.
1977–1989, 2006.
[52] F. Ma and X. Zhang, “Wideband doa estimation based on focusing signal
subspace,” Signal, Image and Video Processing, vol. 13, 06 2019.
[53] S. Ge, K. Li, and S. N. M. Rum, “Deep learning approach in DOA
estimation: A systematic literature review,” Mob. Inf. Syst., vol. 2021,
pp. 6 392 875:1–6 392 875:14, 2021.
[54] S. M. Kay, “Fundamentals of statistical signal processing: estimation
theory,” Technometrics, vol. 37, p. 465, 1993.
[55] H. Krim and J. Proakis, “Smoothed eigenspace-based parameter esti-
mation,” Automatica, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 27–38, 1994, special issue on
statistical signal processing and control.
[56] O. Solomon, R. Cohen, Y. Zhang, Y. Yang, Q. He, J. Luo, R. J. van
Sloun, and Y. C. Eldar, “Deep unfolded robust PCA with application
to clutter suppression in ultrasound,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 39,
no. 4, pp. 1051–1063, 2019.
[57] T. Routtenberg and J. Tabrikian, “Bayesian parameter estimation using
periodic cost functions,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 60, no. 3, pp.
1229–1240, 2011.
[58] ——, “Non-bayesian periodic Cram´er-Rao bound,” IEEE Trans. Signal
Process., vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 1019–1032, 2013.
[59] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[60] S. B. Weinstein, “The history of orthogonal frequency-division multi-
plexing [history of communications],” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 47,
no. 11, pp. 26–35, 2009.
[61] H.-P. Harjes, “Design and siting of a new regional array in central europe,”
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, vol. 80, pp. 1801–1817,
1990.
14
