

===== PAGE 1 =====
2918
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2025
Synthetic Aperture Local Conformal Autoencoder for
Semi-Supervised Speaker’s DOA Tracking
Idan Cohen
, Sharon Gannot
, Fellow, IEEE, and Oﬁr Lindenbaum
Abstract—In this article, we address the problem of tracking
the direction of arrival (DOA) of a moving speaker in noisy and
reverberant environments. We aim to achieve this in real-time,
using as few measurements as possible. Toward this goal, we
present a semi-supervised learning scheme that tracks the speaker
using acoustic features only. Speciﬁcally, we extend a recently pro-
posed method called local conformal autoencoder (LOCA), a deep
neural network (DNN)-based dimensionality reduction technique
that considers the local information from adjacent measurements.
We design a unique training procedure for LOCA, which uses
a synthetic aperture training paradigm to take advantage of the
speaker’s movement during training. We also add an anchoring loss
term to the unsupervised LOCA model, which improves training
stability and establishes a connection between the encoder mapping
and the real-world position of the speaker. Finally, we conduct a
comprehensive simulation study to demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed method in dynamic environments with various
levels of noise and reverberation.
Index Terms—Semi-supervised learning, speaker tracking,
synthetic aperture, LOCA, RTF.
I. INTRODUCTION
S
PEAKER DOA estimation and, in particular, speaker track-
ing are essential tasks in numerous domains, ranging from
automated conferencing solutions [1], [2] to advanced surveil-
lance systems [3], [4]. With precise speaker tracking, these
technologies can enhance sound capture quality, facilitate more
efﬁcient communication, and improve security measures.
Classical solutions for this problem, namely the generalized
cross-correlation phase transform (GCC-PHAT) [5] and its mul-
tichannel extension, the steered-response power phase transform
(SRP-PHAT) [6], rely on analyzing the cross-correlation be-
tween the signals and extracting their peak, which corresponds
with the time difference of arrival (TDOA). Other methods,
such as the multiple signal classiﬁcation (MUSIC) algorithm [7]
and its extensions, offer high-resolution capabilities and rely on
analyzing the covariance matrix of the received signals. These
techniques, initially designated to address single-path static sce-
narios, demonstrate limitations when dealing with the dynamic
Received20September2024;revised8April2025and21June2025;accepted
26 June 2025. Date of publication 14 July 2025; date of current version 18
July 2025. The work was supported by a grant from the Audition Project, Data
Science Program, Council of Higher Education, Israel. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
Dr. Romain Serizel. (Corresponding author: Sharon Gannot.)
The authors are with Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 5290002, Israel
(e-mail: idan.cohen@biu.ac.il; sharon.gannot@biu.ac.il; oﬁr.lindenbaum@biu.
ac.il).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TASLPRO.2025.3587465
Fig. 1.
An illustration of the experimental setup. Dynamic speakers are con-
ﬁned to an arc of radius R around a pair of microphones, both in the training
and test phases. 0 ≤θ(t) ≤180. Blue circles denote labeled samples.
multi-path case. In [8] and [9], a grid search was conducted
over the output power of a beamformer steered to all potential
locations in order to estimate the position. Several recursive
least squares-based tracking methods were presented in [10],
and probabilistic approaches were presented in [11], [12], [13].
In a prevalent probabilistic approach for speaker tracking, the
source path is modeled as a stochastic process, enabling the
utilization of Bayesian inference frameworks. In this approach,
the TDOAs of the sources are estimated, resulting in nonlinear
state-spacemodel equations. Multiplealgorithms wereproposed
in this context, including the Kalman ﬁlter [14], [15] and its
nonlinear extensions, speciﬁcally the extended Kalman ﬁlter
(EKF) [16], [17], the unscented Kalman ﬁlter (UKF) [16], the
multiple model Kalman ﬁlter (MMKF) [18], and the wrapped
Kalman ﬁlter (WKF) [19]. Particle ﬁlters were also suggested as
a viable solution [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], together with hidden
Markov models (HMMs) [25], [26], probability hypothesis den-
sity (PHD) ﬁlters [27], [28], [29], [30] and factor graphs [31].
Similarly, non-Bayesian approaches, based on the recursive
expectation-maximization (REM) procedure, were suggested
at [32], [33], [34], [35], [36], [37].
Recently,
greater
focus
has
been
directed
towards
training-based
localization
methods.
These
approaches
are
usually
divided
into
two
groups—supervised
and
semi/weakly-supervised. In the supervised schemes, the training
dataset consists of samples whose positions are accurately
known. While achieving excellent performance, the supervised
approaches require extensive amounts of labeled data, which are
oftenlaborioustocollect.Suchapproachesinclude[38]and[39],
which suggest applying convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
2998-4173 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:36:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 2 =====
COHEN et al.: SYNTHETIC APERTURE LOCAL CONFORMAL AUTOENCODER FOR SEMI-SUPERVISED SPEAKER’S DOA TRACKING
2919
and fully connected networks (FCNs) to the acoustic features,
respectively. In [40], the authors suggest improving the former
approach by integrating a long short-term memory (LSTM)
network to utilize the temporal relations between consecutive
time frames. Other works, such as [41] and [42], suggest using a
convolutional recurrent neural network (CRNN). In this case, the
recurrent layers model the evolution of the spatial parameters,
given the sequential features and their spatial trajectory. In [43],
the authors suggest applying a supervised U-Net structure with
a dense block to denoise the GCC-PHAT components before
constructing the SRP-PHAT, achieving improved tracking.
In [44], a narrow-band variant of the SRP-PHAT was used
to train a deep time-frequency-based classiﬁcation model.
The proposed approach allows for the localization of multiple
concurrent speakers while circumventing the challenge of a
possible mismatch between microphone array conﬁgurations in
the training and test stages.
In the second group, which includes semi/weakly supervised
approaches, a deeper understanding of the nature of the data is
required to exploit the labeled information efﬁciently. In [45]
and [46], a graph-Laplacian-based manifold learning approach
is used to learn the latent manifold that controls the acoustic
data. In [47], a variational auto encoder (VAE) is used to learn
the probability distribution that characterizes the acoustic data.
In [48], a weakly-supervised setting is considered for localiza-
tion, where additional information regarding the spatial rela-
tionship of samples is given in the form of triplets. The triplets
consist of an anchor, a positive, and a negative sample—based
on their proximity to the anchor. This work was later extended
to the dynamic case in [49]. A comprehensive survey of sound
source localization with deep learning methods can be found
in [50].
In our paper, we adopt the recently proposed LOCA frame-
work [51] for the task of semi-supervised speaker tracking.
LOCA is a manifold learning-based approach that was proved
viableforthetaskof2-dimensionalacousticscenemapping[52].
At the core of the approach lies an auto-encoder, which aims to
extract a low-dimensional latent embedding that is isometric
to the true latent manifold that underlies the data. In Sec-
tion II, we formalize the problem and present the instantaneous
acoustic features used for tracking. In Section III, we introduce
new extensions for LOCA, which aim to take advantage of
the speakers’ movement during training. Our solution involves
adopting the synthetic aperture training paradigm. Additionally,
we adopt a few methodological modiﬁcations to LOCA’s train-
ing framework, aiming to achieve a more stable convergence.
Speciﬁcally, we modify the minimization process and introduce
the anchoring loss term to align the learned embedding to the
real-world coordinates efﬁciently. In Section IV, we benchmark
our proposed scheme against previously discussed semi/weakly
supervised approaches and evaluate them through a series of
simulations. We also discuss the limitations of our approach,
focusing on its performance under various noisy and reverberant
conditions. Additionally, we analyze several other factors to
determine their inﬂuence on the tracking performance. The
discussion is followed by an ablation study to assess the impact
of the proposed methodological changes.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, we formalize the problem and introduce the
instantaneous relative transfer functions (iRTFs)—the acoustic
features used to implement the acoustic tracking.
A. Problem Statement
Consider an acoustic enclosure where a speaker is moving
and recorded by a pair of microphones. Following previous
works [46], [49], we focus ontheone-dimensional setting, where
the speaker can only travel on an arc of radius R around a
microphone pair. In this setting, the DOA, denoted θ(t), rep-
resents the time-varying angular displacement of the speaker
along the arc path around the microphone pair. We also assume
that we are given a small set of anchor points, i.e., samples
whose positions are known and labeled. Importantly, in our
one-dimensional framework, “position” and “location” always
refer to the DOA rather than Cartesian coordinates. Hence,
spatial information throughout this work is understood in terms
of angular displacement rather than absolute spatial positioning.
The discussed setting is illustrated in Fig. 1.
B. Acoustic Features - iRTF
We consider time-domain acoustic measurements of the form
zi(t) = {ai ∗s}(t) + ui(t),
(1)
with s(t) being the source signal, ai(t), the unknown room
impulse responses (RIRs) relating the source and each of the
microphones, i = {1, 2}, and ui(t) the noise signals indepen-
dent of the source.
It follows that in the time-frequency domain, we can approx-
imate the measured signals as:
zi (ℓ, k) ≈ai (ℓ, k) si (ℓ, k) + ui (ℓ, k) ,
(2)
where si(ℓ, k), ai(ℓ, k), and ui(ℓ, k) are the time-frequency
domain representations of si(t), ai(t) and ui(t), respectively,
at time frame index ℓand frequency index k.
Note that, in our case, the speakers are moving, and we,
therefore, have to work with instantaneous acoustic features,
namely the instantaneous relative transfer functions (iRTFs). We
select z1(n) as the reference signal and deﬁne the iRTF as:
h(ℓ, k) = a2(ℓ, k)
a1(ℓ, k).
(3)
We will use a set of Nc context time frames to estimate the iRTF
at any given time frame index ℓ. Without loss of generality,
in our formulation, the parameter Nc is assigned even values.
Assuming negligible noise, the iRTF, ˆh(ℓ, k), can be estimated
from:
ˆh(ℓ, k) ≈
ˆφz2z1(ℓ, k)
ˆφz1z1(ℓ, k)
≈
ℓ+ Nc
2
ℓ′=ℓ−Nc
2 z2(ℓ′, k)z∗
1(ℓ′, k)
ℓ+ Nc
2
ℓ′=ℓ−Nc
2 z1(ℓ′, k)z∗
1(ℓ′, k)
,
(4)
where ˆφz1z1(ℓ, k) and ˆφz2z1(ℓ, k) are the power spectral den-
sity (PSD) and the cross-PSD at time frame ℓ, respectively.
Ultimately, we focus on a subset of the frequency bins range,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:36:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 3 =====
2920
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2025
namely k1, . . . , kP , that includes most spectral power. This
would allow for a reliable estimation of the acoustic features,
further improving the localization accuracy. We ﬁnally deﬁne
our feature vector at time frame ℓas the concatenation of the
real-value and imaginary-value components of the iRTFs in the
designated frequency range:
ˆh(ℓ) =

Re

ˆh(ℓ, k1), . . . , ˆh(ℓ, kP )

,
Im

ˆh(ℓ, k1), . . . , ˆh(ℓ, kP )
⊤
.
(5)
III. PROPOSED TRACKING ALGORITHM
A. The Acoustic Manifold
Previous works have studied the nature of the relative transfer
function (RTF) acoustic features [53], [54], [55]. RTFs are high-
dimensional representations in CD that correspond to the vast
amount of reﬂections from different surfaces characterizing the
enclosure. Essentially, the RTFs depict complex acoustic reﬂec-
tion patterns that serve as ‘ﬁngerprints,’ uniquely distinguishing
the source position in the enclosure. Following the manifold
hypothesis [56], we assume that the RTF features are not spread
uniformly in the entire space of CD. Instead, they are conﬁned to
a compact nonlinear manifold M of dimension d, much smaller
than the ambient space dimension, i.e., d ≪D. This assumption
is justiﬁed by the fact that perturbations of the RTF are only
inﬂuenced by a small set of parameters related to the physical
characteristics of the environment. These parameters include the
enclosure dimensions, its shape, the surfaces’ materials, and the
positions of the microphones and the source. Moreover, we focus
on a static conﬁguration, where the enclosure properties and the
microphone array position remain ﬁxed. In such an acoustic
environment, the only varying degree of freedom is the location
of the source.
Although nonlinear, in small neighborhoods, the manifold is
locally linear, meaning that it is ﬂat in the vicinity of each point
and coincides with the tangent plane to the manifold at that
point [55]. Hence, the Euclidean distance can faithfully measure
afﬁnities between points that reside close to each other on the
manifold. For remote points, however, the Euclidean distance
is meaningless. In practice, we consider the estimated iRTFs as
our acoustic features, which are merely an approximation of the
RTFs. Consequently, the instantaneous features might lie beside
the theoretical acoustic manifold, slightly violating the local
linearity property of the manifold. However, it can be considered
linear in the local neighborhoods for all practical purposes. This
reasoning motivates us to apply a manifold learning technique
that utilizes the local linearity property of the manifold, namely
the LOCA framework.
B. Modiﬁed Local Conformal Autoencoder
Inthiswork,weadopttheLOCAarchitectureproposedin[51]
and suggest methodological modiﬁcations for its training pro-
cess. Brieﬂy, we are interested in an inaccessible latent manifold.
We assume that there is an unknown measurement function
that relates latent states to their measurements in the high di-
mensional observation space, and the measurement function is
assumed to be smooth and nonlinear.
Our approach is based on an autoencoder architecture that
aims to learn an embedding that is isometric to the latent low-
dimensional manifold using its high-dimensional samples. To
achieve this, a localized burst sampling strategy [57] is required.
A burst is a collection comprising samples taken from a local
neighborhood. Consequently, bursts can provide information on
the local variability in the vicinity of each data point. In such
a local neighborhood, the measurement function that maps the
latent manifold to the observed high-dimensional space can be
approximatedaslinear.ThislocallinearityisdescribedbytheJa-
cobian of the measurement function, which captures how small
changes in the latent space propagate to the observed space.
As a result, within a sufﬁciently small neighborhood, Euclidean
distances can be assumed to reliably reﬂect the true geometric
structure of the manifold. That would enable “inverting” the
nonlinear observation function using local approximations of
the associated Jacobian.
We consider the case where the latent domain of our system
of interest is a path-connected domain in the Euclidean space
X ⊂Rd.Observationsofthesystemconsistofsamplescaptured
by a measurement device, processed using (4), and are then
given as a nonlinear smooth and bijective function f : X →Y,
where Y ⊂RD is the ambient or measurement space, and
D ≫d. The high dimensional acoustic features, namely the
RTFs, constitute the measurement space in our setting, while the
speaker position is represented by states on a low dimensional
manifold lying in the latent space. Assume we have N states in
the latent domain, {xi}N
i=1. If we wish to infer an embedding
ρ : RD →Rd, such that the image of ρ ◦f is isometric to X,
then for each state, xi, we can look at a set of M adjacent latent
states, Xi = {x(j)
i }M
j=1 ∈RD, such that Xi ∼N(xi, σ2Id)
are independent random variables. Note that ρ is isometric
to f −1, meaning that they are the same up to some rotation,
mirroring, and translation.
For a ﬁxed 1 ≤i ≤N, we deﬁne the burst (sample cloud)
Y i = {y(j)
i }M
j=1 as the set of independent and identically dis-
tributed samples of the random variable f(Xi) ∈RD, where
M denotes the number of samples in each burst. Following the
mathematical derivation in [51], this deﬁnition requires that such
embedded burst measurements be whitened. Namely,
1
σ2 C(ρ(Y i)) = I
∀1 ≤i ≤N,
(6)
where C is the covariance matrix.
We use an encoder neural network (E) to learn the embed-
ding function ρ. Following (6), we deﬁne the loss term to be
minimized at each iteration:
Lwhite(ρ) = 1
N
N

i=1

1
σ2 ˆ
C(ρ(Y i)) −Id

2
F
,
(7)
with ρ the learned embedding function up to the current iteration
and ˆ
C(ρ(Y i)) is the empirical covariance over a set of M real-
izations{ρ(y(j)
i )}M
j=1.Sincef −1 isinvertible,wefurtherimpose
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:36:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 4 =====
COHEN et al.: SYNTHETIC APERTURE LOCAL CONFORMAL AUTOENCODER FOR SEMI-SUPERVISED SPEAKER’S DOA TRACKING
2921
an invertibility property on ρ. This effectively regularizes the
solution of ρ by preventing noninvertible functions. Practically,
invertibility is imposed using a decoder neural network (D)
parameterized by γ. This approach induces a loss term based
on the mean squared error (MSE) between samples and their
reconstructed counterparts:
Lrecon(ρ, γ) =
1
N · M
N,M

i,j=1
y(j)
i
−γ

ρ(y(j)
i )

2
2 .
(8)
We further add a new anchoring loss term to stabilize the
solution and remove arbitrary scaling and rotations from the
embedding learned by LOCA. Since we learn an embedding
ρ that is only isometric to the inverse measurement function
f −1, we need to relate the embedded samples—i.e., the pre-
dicted speaker positions, to their real-world coordinates. In [52]
and [51], the incorporation of real-world coordinates into the
embedding was done only past the training stage, where an
orthogonal transformation for the embedding was found by
comparing the embedded anchor samples to their true positions.
However, we found that using a small set of anchor points
during training would be sufﬁcient to accurately calibrate the
embedding and improve the overall stability of the training
process, as we demonstrate in Section IV-G. Assume that we
have a set of NL labeled samples, {yk}NL
k=1, whose latent states,
{xk}NL
k=1, are known. We deﬁne the anchoring loss term as the
mean squared error between the embedded samples and their
latent states:
Lanchor(ρ) = 1
K
NL

k=1
∥ρ(yk) −xk∥2 .
(9)
Finally, our objective is to minimize the combined loss term
L = λwhite · Lwhite + λrecon · Lrecon + λanchor · Lanchor,
(10)
where λwhite, λrecon and λanchor are the weighting factors for
the whitening, the reconstruction, and the anchoring loss terms,
respectively.
Wenotethat in[51], theauthors usedamulti-stepapproachfor
iterative minimization of the reconstruction and whitening loss
terms. In contrast, we suggest using a single-step approach to
minimize the combined loss term (10), resulting in a much more
stable learning process. This will also be further discussed and
validated in Section IV-G. The training scheme for the LOCA
framework is illustrated in Fig. 2.
C. Synthetic Aperture Paradigm for Bursts Acquisition
Adopting the LOCA framework for our 1-dimensional prob-
lem, {xi}i, the latent states in our system are simply the speaker
DOAs, {θ(ℓ)}ℓ. The high-dimensional features we sample,
{yi}i are the iRTF features {ˆh(l)}ℓ.
One of the key differences in this work from [52], which
involved performing a static 2-dimensional acoustic-scene map-
ping, is the reverse of roles between the sources and receivers.
In [52], the sound sources were ﬁxed, and the acoustic manifold
was consequently controlled by the position of the microphone
array. In that case, learning the manifold essentially resulted in
Fig. 2.
An illustration of the modiﬁed LOCA framework training scheme. The
latent space is a low-dimensional manifold in a high-dimensional measurement
space. Bursts of adjacent samples from the measurement space are fed into
the encoder, aiming to whiten their embedding (see (7)). The embeddings of
the anchors (blue circles) are compared to their true positions via the anchoring
loss(9).Theembeddingsarethenfedintothedecodertoreconstructtheinput(8).
the mapping of the acoustic scene. In this work, the microphone
array is ﬁxed, the acoustic manifold is controlled by the position
of the speakers, and the embedding we learn is used to track
the DOA of the speaker. Importantly, training LOCA to infer an
embedding that is isometric to the latent space requires clusters
of neighboring samples (referred to as sample bursts). However,
acquiring such data can be challenging. In [52], we devised a
unique, albeit complex, 2-dimensional microphone array that
allowed for the collection of bursts of adjacent samples. When
we limit ourselves to the 1-dimensional setting, we can devise
a simple solution that takes advantage of the dynamics of the
speakers. When recording a moving speaker along the arc,
we can think of measurements of consecutive instantaneous
acoustic features as if they arrive from a local neighborhood
in which the measurement function does not vary dramatically.
This allows us to deﬁne local bursts. Our inspiration was the
synthetic aperture paradigm in the radio detection and ranging
(RADAR) domain [58], where movement is utilized to increase
the resolution of the measured signal. In synthetic aperture
RADAR (SAR), the motion of the RADAR antenna effectively
increases its aperture, thereby improving its spatial resolution
compared to conventional static radar systems. In our case, the
goal is not to increase the resolution of the signal acquisition, but
rather to enhance the spatial sampling of the acoustic manifold
itself. Speciﬁcally, the movement of the speaker—rather than the
movement of the microphones—facilitates a denser sampling of
the acoustic manifold than would be achievable with stationary
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:36:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 5 =====
2922
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2025
speakers. Therefore, “synthetic aperture” in this context refers
not to the virtual enlargement of the microphone array aperture,
but to the synthetic accumulation of spatial samples as the
speaker moves across a trajectory. This concept is analogous
to SAR in spirit but with reversed roles: while SAR involves
a moving sensor observing a stationary scene, our setup has
stationary microphones observing a dynamic source.
In the following paragraphs, we will further formalize this
concept, depicting our paradigm for collecting bursts of mea-
surements.
Given the recording of a dynamic speaker conﬁned to a
1-dimensional arc, our goal is to collect adjacent samples from
the recording to train our network. The recording consists of
two channels—{z1(t), z2(t)}. We need to collect trustworthy
samples to ensure the reliability of the extracted acoustic fea-
tures. To estimate the iRTF features accurately, it is essential
to use recording segments that have sufﬁcient active speech. To
ensure this, the ﬁrst step is to apply a voice activity detector
(VAD) algorithm that only maintains the active time frames.
Here, we apply short time Fourier transform (STFT) using a
window size of NFFT = 2048 and overlap of 75% between the
adjacent windows to divide the recording into a group of time
frames, {ti}i. Once the VAD algorithm is applied to the time
frames, we are left only with the active time frames,
T = {ℓi
		VAD (z1(ℓi)) = 1}.
(11)
Deﬁne N train
c
as the number of context frames required to esti-
mate the iRTFs during the training phase. Also, deﬁne N test
c
as
the number of context frames needed for estimation during the
test phase. Note that, in general, their value might differ, and it is
up to the user to decide the number of context frames used during
the test stage as it is closely related to the inference latency. Es-
sentially, using more frames achieves better iRTF estimation but
smears the DOA of the speaker. This phenomenon is especially
pronounced at higher speaker velocities. An additional consid-
eration when changing the inference latency is the mismatch
between the training and test data. We aim to learn a model that
can generalize its predictions to iRTF samples estimated with a
different number of context frames. In Section IV-D we delve
deeper into this matter.
To ensure that the estimation of training samples is done using
sufﬁcient active speech, we aim to keep only the time frames that
are found in active time segments, i.e., their range of context
frames is fully active:
ˆT =

ℓi ∈T
					∀ℓi −N train
c
2
≤ℓj ≤ℓi + N train
c
2
, ℓj ∈T

.
(12)
After collecting all active time segments, our goal is to create
adjacent bursts of iRTF samples. As discussed earlier, we can
considerconsecutiveiRTFestimatesasmeasurementsthatarrive
from adjacent positions on the arc by utilizing the speaker’s
movement. We set the size of each burst to M = 5 and collect
all groups of 5 time frames in ˆT with a spacing of 2 time-frames
to construct our training set. The spacing taken between frames
is a variable that determines the in-burst distance between iRTF
Algorithm 1: Training-Bursts Acquisition.
Input: Two-channel training recordings, {z1(t), z2(t)},
of dynamic speakers moving along a 1-dimensional arc.
Output: Tensor of dimensions [N, M, D], containing N
bursts of M local iRTF samples, each of dimension D.
for each train recording {z1(t), z2(t)} do
1) Apply a VAD to ﬁnd which time-frames ℓi contain
active speech (see (11)).
2) Find the group ˆT which contains only the time frames
ℓi ∈T whose entire set of context frames is active
(see (12)).
3) Collect time-frame bursts - all groups of M = 5
time-frames in ˆT with spacing of 2 time-frames
(see (13)).
4) According to (4) and (5), estimate the D-dimensional
iRTFs, ˆh(ℓ), for each time-frame ℓin each time-frame
burst ˜Tj. Store the iRTF-bursts in the output tensor.
end for
measurements. Large spacing results in bursts of measurements
that are not local, whereas spacing that is too small might
not capture enough variability within the burst. Choosing a
spacing of two frames is a good compromise between these two
considerations. The time-frame bursts are of the form
˜Ti = {ℓi −4, ℓi −2, ℓi, ℓi + 2, ℓi + 4}.
(13)
Finally, we use each of the collected time-frame bursts in
{ ˜Ti}i and estimate its iRTFs using (4) over each time frame.
The DOAs at these time frames and their corresponding es-
timated iRTFs are, in fact, the latent states within each burst
and their high-dimensional observations, respectively. Namely,
we can write that {x(j)
i }M
j=1 = {θ(ℓ(j)
i )}M
j=1 and {y(j)
i }M
j=1 =
{ˆh(ℓ(j)
i )}M
j=1, where each burst contains M = 5 samples.
Since our primary focus is speech data, we consider only
the frequency-bin range [41 −320], which corresponds to the
frequencies 312–2500 Hz for our choice of NFFT = 2048. This
range includes most of the speech power distribution. Given
that we are required to concatenate both the real and imaginary
parts of the iRTF (5), we are left with features of dimension
D = 560. Algorithm 1 outlines the process of training-bursts
collection and is followed by Algorithm 2, which summarizes
both the training process and the tracking methodology.
We note that the essential requirement for the sample bursts
deﬁned in Section III-B is that the latent states associated with
each burst are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
Gaussian variables. In simpler terms, this means that the locally
spatial distributions of samples within different bursts behave
similarly and follow an isotropic Gaussian distribution. Note,
however, that in the case where σ ≪1, other isotropic distribu-
tions could also be used to model the local perturbations around
states. To fulﬁll these requirements, we require that during the
training stage, the speakers move at a constant velocity. We
can then set the size of each burst to M = 5 and gather ﬁve
evenly spaced samples in time. It also follows that they are
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:36:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 6 =====
COHEN et al.: SYNTHETIC APERTURE LOCAL CONFORMAL AUTOENCODER FOR SEMI-SUPERVISED SPEAKER’S DOA TRACKING
2923
Fig. 3.
An illustration of the synthetic aperture paradigm used for collecting
bursts of measurements. Samples recorded at a group of consecutive time-
frames, ˜Ti, are grouped together to form the sample bursts {y(j)
i
}M
j=1 =
{ˆh(ℓ(j)
i
)}M
j=1 for M = 5. For a speaker moving at a constant velocity, the
latent states attributed to these samples, {x(j)
i
}M
j=1 = {θ(ℓ(j)
i
)}M
j=1, follow an
isotropic 1-dimensional uniform distribution in the latent space, thus satisfying
the requirements for using the LOCA framework.
Algorithm
2:
Synthetic
Aperture
LOCA
for
Semi-
Supervised Speaker Tracking.
TRAINING STAGE
Input: NL labeled samples {zlabeled
1
(t), zlabeled
2
(t)},
synthetic aperture bursts tensor of dimensions
[N, M, D].
Output: An encoder network (E) parameterized by ρ
for Nepochs do
Feed batches of bursts into the model, single-step
minimizing the loss function in (10).
end for
TEST STAGE - TRACKING
Input A new recording containing a pair of signal
measurements, {ztest
1 (t), ztest
2 (t)}, produced by an
unknown source moving in an unknown location on the
arc.
Output Estimated per frame DOA ˆθ(ℓ), ∀ℓ.
1) According to (4) and (5) estimate the corresponding
iRTF, ˆh(ℓ) at time frame ℓusing N test
c
context frames.
2) Predict the DOA at time frame ℓusing ˆθ(ℓ) = ρ(ˆh(ℓ)).
uniformly spaced in the latent space, thus satisfying the required
conditions.
A conceptual depiction of this paradigm is illustrated in Fig. 3.
We also add a block diagram in Fig. 4.
D. Model Training and Parameters
We implemented both the encoder and decoder using simple
feed-forward architectures. The encoder consists of an initial
layer of dimension D = 560 with no nonlinearity, followed by
ﬁve consecutive layers of size 200 with ‘Leaky-Relu’ activa-
tions, ending with a latent representation layer of size d = 1.
Similarly, the decoder consists of the latent representation layer
with no nonlinearity, followed by four layers of size 200 with
‘tanh’ activations, an additional linear layer of size 200, and an
output reconstruction layer of size D. We use batches of size
2048 samples and a learning rate of 10−3. The value of σ2 is
set to 6 · 10−4. In the original manuscript of LOCA, the authors
apply alternating minimization steps between the whitening and
reconstruction loss terms. We found, however, that a more stable
solution is obtained by minimizing a combined loss function
in (10). The loss terms are weighted using λwhite = 1, λrecon = 25
and λanchor = 100. Finally, we use 90% of the learning-phase
data during training, and the rest 10% are used for validation
and determining the best model weights.
E. Future Extensions
Our work utilizes the LOCA framework for tracking a single
speech source. Multi-source extensions may use speech sparsity,
namely that speech sources are ‘isolated’ in the time-frequency
(TF) domain [59], a property often referred to as W-disjoint
orthogonality (WDO) [60]. This assumption was widely used
for multi-source localization or TDOA estimation, e.g., [61],
[62], [63]. In [39], the WDO assumption was used with the
iRTF as an input feature to track multiple sources. In [37], a
manifold-basedmultiplespeakertrackingmethodwasproposed.
The manifold was inferred ofﬂine for a single and static source
using a geometric method (diffusion maps), and the multi-
speaker tracking was implemented through the application of
the REM procedure with the iRTFs as input features. Extending
our proposed LOCA-based DOA tracking to multiple speakers
remains a challenge for future work.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL STUDY
In this section, we conduct several experiments to compare
the performance of our method with that of other schemes.
We highlight the merits and limitations of our approach. Our
experiments involve acoustic settings with reverberation levels
of up to RT60 = 600 ms, and we consider various signal to
noise ratio (SNR) conditions of either 30, 20, 15, or 10 dB.
The distance between the microphones is set to 8 cm, and the
radius of the arc is set to 2 m. The evaluation and comparison of
all tracking methods focus on the broadside of the microphone
conﬁguration, considering DOAs in the range [30◦−150◦].
In subsection IV-A, we specify the performance measures
used to evaluate all approaches. In subsection IV-B, we compare
the different approaches in a setup where the test data and the
training data are drawn from the same constellation (position
and orientation of the microphone array and the arc within the
acoustic enclosure). Although the training and test stages share
the same features, they differ in both velocity and speakers’
identities, Through subsections IV-C and IV-D, we assess the
inﬂuenceoftwohyper-parametersontheperformanceofLOCA,
alsohavingmatchingacousticsetupbetweenthetrainingandtest
stage. Namely, the considered hyper-parameters are the number
of speakers that provide anchors during training and the latency
during test stage. In subsection IV-F, we test LOCA’s sensitivity
to different array-speaker constellations during the test phase. In
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:36:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 7 =====
2924
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2025
Fig. 4.
Block diagram visualization of both the training (including the burst acquisition algorithm) and inference stages.
that case, we will have a mismatch between the training and test
data. Finally, in subsection IV-G, we assess the inﬂuence of the
two methodological changes we introduce for LOCA’s training
process. There, we focus on a speciﬁc acoustic setting where the
test data matches the constellation of the training data.
A. Evaluation and Performance Measures
The performance of all methods was evaluated using two
metrics. We deﬁne an outlier DOA estimate as an instance that
diverges more than 15◦from the true DOA. Therefore, our ﬁrst
performance measure is the Accuracy, which corresponds to
the percentage of inlier estimates that do not exceed the 15◦
threshold. Denote:
Ninliers =
			

i|1 ≤i ≤Ntest,
			ˆθi −θi
			 ≤15◦			
(14)
The Accuracy is then deﬁned as:
Accuracy = Ninliers
Ntest
%.
(15)
The second performance measure is the root mean square error
(RMSE). Only inlier estimates are considered for calculating the
RMSE over the test set.
RMSE =

1
Ninliers
Ninliers
i=1

ˆθi −θi
2
.
(16)
For each experiment, we will specify the test set used for the
evaluation.
B. Simulation I - Method Comparison
In the following simulation, we compare our method with
competing algorithms. As stated before, we present the results
for different acoustic settings, each with a different level of
noise and reverberation, examining different amounts of anchor
samples. For each acoustic setting, a Monte Carlo simulation is
conducted. A single simulation comprises 20 different constel-
lations, which are determined by the position and orientation of
the microphone array within a [6, 6, 2.4] m simulated room. In
this simulation, for each constellation, a LOCA-neural network
is trained and evaluated on the same constellation. Consequently,
a distribution of the RMSEs over the different constellations and
their average accuracy is obtained.
1) Training Data: To create the training dataset, 28 random
speakers were sampled from the TIMIT dataset [64], equally
distributed between males and females. Several recordings from
each speaker were concatenated to create an extended recording
of continuous speech. To simulate the moving speakers’ signals,
we used the signal generator package1 for MATLAB. Each
speaker was modeled as an omnidirectional source. For each
constellation, the extended recordings of each speaker were used
to simulate a single complete traversal over the arc at a constant
velocity of 0.25 m/s.
The directional noise signals, ui(t), are generated using
a simulated white Gaussian noise (WGN) source located at
[4, 1, 1.8]. The source is located 60 cm above the plane where
the microphones are stationed, at z = 1.2 m. These sources are
1Available at the repository - github.com/ehabets/Signal-Generator
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:36:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 8 =====
COHEN et al.: SYNTHETIC APERTURE LOCAL CONFORMAL AUTOENCODER FOR SEMI-SUPERVISED SPEAKER’S DOA TRACKING
2925
static and are therefore generated by using the RIR generator2 to
simulate their RIRs, and then convolving the RIRs with WGN
signals.
These 28 two-microphone signals of each constellation are
then used along with Algorithm 1 to collect all possible bursts
for training, resulting in 117,000 training bursts. The VAD
algorithm that is used during this process is WebRTC-VAD,3
with the aggressiveness level set to 2. The amount of context
frames used to estimate the training iRTFs is N train
c
= 10.
In this simulation, we are exploring the scenario where only
one of the speakers is used to provide labeled anchor samples.
Speciﬁcally, we are investigating cases where the number of
anchor samples NL is 3, 4, or 5, and the anchors are evenly
positioned along the arc.
An additional train dataset was created in order to evaluate
LOCA’s performance when it is trained using a dynamic WGN
source signal traversing the arc only once. Here, a single train
recording is simulated in the same manner as the TIMIT record-
ings. After applying Algorithm 1, we are left with 1,520 training-
bursts only. The idea here is to exploit the fact that the power
spectral density of the WGN is richer. This approach might
be advantageous in simplifying the training process—requiring
only a single traversal of the sound source over the arc, thus
resulting in substantially fewer training bursts and much faster
model convergence. The drawback, however, is that the learned
model should be able to generalize to our test set, which consists
of speech data. In the result section, the two approaches are
distinguished by using either of the terms LOCA_Speech or
LOCA_WGN.
2) Test Data: An additional 28 new speakers were sampled
from the TIMIT dataset for the test dataset. For each constel-
lation, the signals were simulated along the arc using the same
approach as in the training dataset, with a single difference that
the test speakers’ velocities are selected from a set of values
[0.25, 0.55, 0.85, 1.15] m/s. For each speaker, 20 test samples
are drawn from the region of interest per test velocity, resulting
in an overall of 2,240 test samples for each constellation. In this
simulation, the number of context frames used to estimate the
test iRTFs is N test
c
= 20.
3) Competing Methods: The competing methods we con-
sider are deep ranking (DR) [49], manifold regularization learn-
ing (MRL) [46] and isometrically regularized variational auto
encoder (IRVAE) [65]. It is essential to acknowledge that while
both DR and MRL were developed and evaluated for the speciﬁc
aim of speaker localization and tracking, IRVAE has not been
applied to acoustic data thus far. A single challenge with IRVAE
was that while it learns an isometric mapping for the embedding,
the authors do not provide a means to anchor the embedding
coordinates to the real-world positions. Our most effective solu-
tion involved post-training calibration of the embedding using
the anchor set, similar to the calibration in [52].
4) Results and Discussion: Fig. 5 comprises multiple box
plots that depict the performance of the different methods over
the different acoustic settings, considering the various amounts
2Available at the repository github.com/ehabets/RIR-Generator
3Available at the repository - https://github.com/wiseman/py-webrtcvad
of anchor samples. Examining LOCA_Speech, it is evident
that we obtain very impressive results, having reached median
RMSEs as low as 4◦with an accuracy of nearly 100 %. Even
though the training is performed on sources moving at a constant
velocity, the results indicate that all methods can generalize their
predictions to higher velocities as well. We stress that a minimal
number of labeled anchor samples was required to achieve this
notable performance. It is only under extreme conditions, where
both the reverberation and the noise level are high, that we see
a noticeable decrease in performance compared to the other
methods. It may seem that sometimes other methods, namely the
IRVAE, obtain better RMSEs. In most acoustic settings, how-
ever, LOCA_speech provides the best performance in terms of
accuracy while, more importantly, judging the whiskers’ length,
it shows lower variance, thus providing more reliable conver-
gence across different constellations. In that sense, IRVAE,
which might appear to be a good approach, is inconsistent when
trained on different constellations. In the case of LOCA_WGN,
we observe highly stable results, indicated by signiﬁcantly thin-
ner whiskers. However, the performance measures are not as
robust as those achieved by LOCA_Speech. This conﬁrms our
concern that the learned model might struggle to generalize from
the WGN-induced training data to the dynamic-speaker-induced
test data. Nevertheless, in cases where achieving fast model
convergence is a top priority or when obtaining training speakers
is challenging, a viable compromise would be to train on a single
WGN recording.
We evaluate the computational resources required for the
proposed method, comparing it to DR and IRVAE, the two other
deep-learning-based approaches. The measures we consider are
1) Number of Model Parameters, 2) GPU Memory Usage,4 3)
Inference Time,5 4) Peak Memory,6 5) CUDA Execution Time,7
6) FLOPS8 - number of ﬂoating point operations per sample.
The reported measures, which are reported in Table I, were
all computed using NVIDIA’s Tesla T4 GPU. While LOCA
seems to reach better results, it is also the heaviest model of
the compared approaches.
C. Simulation II - Number of Speakers Providing Anchors
In the second simulation, we focus solely on LOCA_Speech’s
performance. In the previous simulation, only a single speaker
was used to generate a set of NL uniformly spread labeled
anchor samples on the arc. We aim to investigate the impact
of the number of speakers providing labels on the results. In
4GPUmemory usage is recorded using nvidia-smi, an NVIDIAcommand-line
utility that tracks GPU resource consumption, including memory allocation. The
reported memory usage is measured with a batch size of 1 for all methods to
ensure consistency.
5Inference time is measured as the average time required for a single forward
pass, computed over 1,000 runs on a CUDA-enabled device. Timing is recorded
with torch.cuda.Event(enable_timing=True).record().
6Peak memory consumption during the forward pass is tracked using
torch.cuda.memory.max_memory_allocated().
7CUDA execution time represents the average processing time per inference
sample across 1,000 runs, measured using torch.profiler.
8FLOPS
is
the
number
of
ﬂoating
points
operations
per
inference
sample.
It
is
estimated
using
PyTorch’s
torch.utils.flop_counter.FlopCounterMode.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:36:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 9 =====
2926
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2025
Fig. 5.
A comparison between the RMSE and Accuracy measures for the different acoustic settings (Simulation I). Each sub-ﬁgure is attributed to a different
amount of labeled anchor samples used. Within each sub-ﬁgure, a comparison is made for each possible combination of the examined SNR and reverberation
levels. The boxes represent the distribution of RMSEs (16) achieved for 20 different constellations, while the red triangles denote their tracking accuracy (15).
this scenario, we ﬁx NL = 5 uniformly spread labeled training
samples per such speaker. Both the training and test data remain
the same as in the previous simulation, with the only difference
being the increase in number of anchored speakers.
1) Results and Discussion: The simulation results are de-
picted in Fig. 6. It is evident that while the improvement is
less pronounced at low to mid-reverberation levels, a signiﬁcant
enhancement is observed in highly reverberated acoustic envi-
ronments. Speciﬁcally, notable improvement is observed when
the number of anchored speakers is increased to three. This
outcome effectively addresses the challenges we encountered
earlier in the extreme acoustic conditions. While not requiring
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:36:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 10 =====
COHEN et al.: SYNTHETIC APERTURE LOCAL CONFORMAL AUTOENCODER FOR SEMI-SUPERVISED SPEAKER’S DOA TRACKING
2927
Fig. 6.
Comparison between LOCA-Speech’s performance over various amounts of speakers that provide labeled samples, demonstrated for the discussed
reverberated and noisy conditions (Simulation II). For each speaker, 5 uniformly spaced anchor samples are drawn from the arc. The boxes represent the distribution
of RMSEs (16) achieved for 20 different constellations, while the red triangles denote their tracking accuracy (15).
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF THE REQUIRED COMPUTATIONAL RESOURCES FOR THE
COMPETING METHODS
a signiﬁcant amount of additional labels, we are now able to
consistently achieve good results in these settings both in terms
of tracking accuracy and RMSE.
D. Simulation III - Inﬂuence of the Number of Context-Frames
When addressing the task of online dynamic speaker track-
ing, it is crucial to consider the proposed solution’s ability to
perform effectively across various latency levels. Consequently,
we found interest in exploring LOCA’s ability to generalize
its predictions for different values of context frames utilized
during the test phase compared to those used during the training
phase. We implement the same training methodology used in
Simulation I for this simulation. Similar to Simulation I, only a
single anchored speaker is providing anchors for training. The
primary difference lies in the evaluation of LOCA’s performance
across different number of context frames. These test datasets
differ only in the number of context frames used for iRTF
estimation, where the considered values for N test
c
range from 6
to 20.
1) Results and Discussion: Fig. 7 illustrates the evaluation
results of LOCA on a different number of context frames. In
most acoustic settings, a slight improvement is noticeable when
additional context frames are used to estimate the test iRTFs.
This improvement is apparent both in Accuracy and in RMSE
distribution, and it is due to the more precise estimation of the
iRTF acoustic features when more context frames are utilized.
However, a slight decrease in performance is noticeable in the
case of N test
c
= 6, mainly in challenging reverberation and noise
conditions. This performance degradation may be due to the
decreased accuracy in the acoustic feature estimation as the
number of context frames decreases, an issue that is especially
evident in harsh environmental conditions. Nonetheless, it is
apparent that LOCA presents robust generalization capabilities,
offering signiﬁcant ﬂexibility in handling variations between the
number of context frames during training and test phases.
E. Simulation IV - Generalization to Radial Distance
Variations
As explained in detail in Section III-A, the only parameter
governing the acoustic manifold in our setup is the speaker’s
DOA along a ﬁxed-radius arc. This constraint allowed us to
establish a direct mapping between the acoustic features and
the single parameter that deﬁnes the manifold. In the current
setup, we introduce a new degree of freedom during the test
phase—the speaker’s radial position—which becomes an addi-
tional parameter governing the manifold. To assess the model’s
ability to generalize under this new condition, we conducted
an additional experiment where, during testing, the speaker’s
radius varied sinusoidally between 1.8 m and 2.2 m, while the
model was still trained on a ﬁxed 2 m arc. We followed the
same Monte Carlo procedure, this time incorporating this more
complex dynamics into the test data. The results, presented
in Fig. 8, demonstrate that the model successfully adapts to
these variations, maintaining robust performance even when the
radial distance changes during inference. However, performance
degradation is observed under highly reverberant conditions.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:36:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 11 =====
2928
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2025
Fig. 7.
Performance comparison of LOCA model that was trained on speech data (LOCA-Speech) when evaluated over a different number of test context frames
Ntest
c
(Simulation III). Here, the amount of context frames used for training is Ntrain
c
= 10.
Fig. 8.
Comparison between LOCA-Speech’s performance for various rever-
berated and noisy conditions (Simulation IV), evaluated when the speaker moves
along an arc with a sinusoidally varying radius between 1.8 m and 2.2 m. The
results demonstrate the model’s ability to generalize to radial distance variations
during inference.
F. Simulation V - Sensitivity to Array-Speaker Constellation
In our ﬁnal simulation, we aim to investigate LOCA’s sen-
sitivity to different array-speaker constellations. Essentially,
this could be thought of as some sort of spatial generalization
interpolation of a trained model to new mic-array positions and
orientations within the enclosure. Given an acoustic setting,
LOCA is trained on dynamic speakers drawn from a set of
training constellations. The task is then to track speakers drawn
from new constellations in the enclosure that were not seen
during training. Recall that different constellations are simply
determined by the position and orientation of the microphone
pair and the speakers within the enclosure. We note that all of
the constellations in this simulation are constrained to the plane
z = 1.2 m. Furthermore, the constellations under consideration
involve speakers positioned at a radius of r = 2 m from the
microphone pairs. The position of the noise source remains
Fig. 9.
An abstract visualization for Simulation V - assessing LOCA’s sensitiv-
ity to array-speaker constellation. Our training data consists of speakers traveling
along arcs of a number of constellations (gray arcs). The test data belongs to
constellations not seen during training (red arcs). The interference source is
located on [x, y] = [4, 1], similar to the previous simulations. Both training and
evaluation are conducted under the same acoustic setting (i.e., under the same
reverberation and SNR levels).
unaltered. Since this scenario is signiﬁcantly more challenging
than previous ones, we excluded the 10 dB SNR case, as the
method did not produce meaningful results under such severe
noise conditions. The above idea is conceptualized in Fig. 9.
1) Training Data: To generate the training dataset, we con-
sidered 24 different training constellations for any given acoustic
setting. For ideal training, different training constellations are
chosen so that the entire room is covered in the most symmetrical
manner. Each training constellation includes 7 random speakers
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:36:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 12 =====
COHEN et al.: SYNTHETIC APERTURE LOCAL CONFORMAL AUTOENCODER FOR SEMI-SUPERVISED SPEAKER’S DOA TRACKING
2929
drawn from the TIMIT dataset. Similarly to Simulation I, we
use the extended speaker recordings and the signal generator
package for MATLAB. The speakers were simulated with a
constant velocity of 0.25 m/s, this time while conducting back-
and-forth traversal along the arc. After applying Algorithm 1
for training-bursts collection with N train
c
= 10 training con-
text frames, each training constellation provided approximately
9,100 bursts, resulting in a total of 218,400 bursts from the
entire acoustic enclosure. For this simulation, which is already
very challenging, we allow each of the 7 speakers to provide 5
equally-spaced anchor samples in each training constellation.
2) Test Data: For evaluation, we consider 24 test constel-
lations that the model has not seen during training. In each
constellation, 10 speakers are considered for evaluation. Once
again, we are interested in evaluating the model’s perfor-
mance over multiple velocities, examining speaker velocities of
[0.25, 0.55, 0.85, 1.15] m/s. For each speaker, the iRTF features
are estimated using N test
c
= 20, of which 20 samples are drawn
per each of the four speaker velocities. This results in a total of
19,200 test samples per acoustic setting.
3) Results and Discussion: In this simulation, it is important
to note that the training is conducted collectively using data
extracted from multiple constellations within the enclosure. This
differs from our previous simulations, in which the models were
trained and evaluated individually on the exact constellations
for each acoustic setting. In the current setup, both the training
and test datasets are drawn from all possible array-speaker
constellations in the enclosure. Consequently, we train a single
model for the entire enclosure. Unlike previously, the results are
not visualized through box plots of a Monte Carlo simulation
but are instead represented in a tabular format, showcasing
the performance measures achieved across the combined test
dataset. The baseline model used for comparison is the IRVAE
discussed earlier. The MRL approach was not considered for
the task, as the great number of training samples is an obstacle
for kernel-based methods. Additionally, multiple attempts to
utilize the DR model for the task approach were not successful
at all.
Table II presents the simulation results. Aside from showing
the results of the current experiment (Cur.), we include the nomi-
nal results (Nom.) from Simulation I to show the degradation in
performance due to dealing with the more challenging setup.
It is worth noting that both IRVAE and LOCA demonstrate
considerable success in this challenging task, LOCA appears
less sensitive to the array-speaker constellation. As observed,
both approaches generally experience a decline in performance
as the noise and reverberation levels increase. Inspecting LOCA,
we see that, as expected, both the prediction accuracy and the
prediction RMSE are negatively affected in this setup compared
to previous simulations. However, in almost every acoustic set-
ting, LOCA outperforms IRVAE when comparing both median
RMSE and accuracy measures. A single acoustic setting that sets
the most signiﬁcant obstacle for LOCA is the challenging setting
of SNR = 15 dB and RT60 = 600 ms. Under these conditions,
the model learns an unreliable embedding for the manifold, and
consequently, predictions signiﬁcantly diverge from the actual
positions.
TABLE II
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE MODIFIED LOCA AND IRVAE IN THE
ARRAY-SPEAKER SENSITIVITY EXPERIMENT (SIMULATION V))
G. Ablation Study
As stressed earlier in this manuscript, we have included sev-
eral methodological adjustments to the LOCA training frame-
work to achieve more consistent convergence. In [51], a post-
training calibration was suggested for incorporating the real-
world coordinates into the learned embedding. Later, in [52],
the single-step minimization of the loss function was suggested
while the post-training calibration approach was still used. In
the current work, we also include the single-step minimization
approach as an adjustment for the loss term, which is an alter-
native to the multi-step minimization approach (Section III-D).
However, the main modiﬁcation we introduce involves incorpo-
rating the additional anchoring loss term into the optimization
process.
In the following brief ablation study, we demonstrate the
training stability of our proposed approach by comparing it with
two ablated versions. The ﬁrst ablated version, referred to as
‘Multi-step minimization,’ is identical to our proposed approach
except that it integrates multi-step minimization of the loss func-
tion. The second ablated approach, referred to as ‘Post-training
calibration,’ also retains the core components of our approach
but includes post-training calibration of the embedding instead
of the proposed additional anchoring loss term. By comparing
the performance of these ablated approaches with our proposed
approach, we aim to assess each component’s impact on the
LOCA framework’s overall effectiveness.
The models are trained and evaluated using our 1-dimensional
data, following the performance measures discussed earlier.
We conduct a Monte Carlo simulation for the task, mirror-
ing the approach used in Simulation I and utilizing the same
training and test datasets. Speciﬁcally, we consider an acoustic
setting with reverberation and noise levels of RT60 = 600 ms
and 30 dB, respectively. The results are presented in Fig. 10.
It is evident that the proposed approach achieves both the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:36:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 13 =====
2930
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2025
Fig. 10.
An ablation study on the stability of training for the different training
approaches of LOCA. The results shown are attributed to the acoustic setting of
RT60 = 600 ms and 30 dB SNR.
lowest median RMSE and the narrowest whiskers. In com-
parison, the ablated versions achieve slightly inferior results
in median RMSE, with signiﬁcantly wider and skewed RMSE
distributions observed across the 20 constellations in the en-
closure. These ﬁndings clearly indicate that the proposed ap-
proach leads to signiﬁcantly more stable and reliable overall
performance.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we adopt LOCA, a DNN-based manifold learn-
ing approach. LOCA, which was proven viable for the task
of acoustic scene mapping, is now used for semi-supervised
dynamic speaker tracking. We introduce two novel adjustments
to the original algorithm to further optimize the training process:
the anchoring loss term and the single-step minimization. By uti-
lizing high-dimensional instantaneous relative transfer function
(iRTF) acoustic features lying on a manifold, the model learns
an embedding that is isometric to the latent manifold underlying
the data. Our approach aims to utilize a minimal amount of
labeled data, a resource often scarce. To achieve that, we apply
the synthetic aperture training paradigm to exploit local relations
between subsequent samples, effectively leveraging the speak-
ers’ movement during the training phase. A series of simulations
showcases the proposed method’s ability to track speakers under
challenging noise and reverberation conditions and the inﬂuence
of the number of labeled samples. Furthermore, it demonstrates
notable generalization capabilities, enabling predictions for both
higher speaker velocities, varying levels of latency, and varying
radial distance from the microphone array. Lastly, it shows
robustness for different array-speaker constellations within the
acoustic enclosure.
REFERENCES
[1] B. H. Yoshimi and G. S. Pingali, “A multimodal speaker detection and
tracking system for teleconferencing,” in Proc. 10th ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia, ser. MM02, Dec. 2002, pp. 427–428.
[2] H. Gamper, S. Tervo, and T. Lokki, “Speaker tracking for teleconferencing
via binaural headset microphones,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Acoust. Signal
Enhancement, 2012, pp. 1–4.
[3] C. Zieger, A. Brutti, and P. Svaizer, “Acoustic based surveillance system
for intrusion detection,” in Proc. 6th IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Video Signal
Based Surveill., Sep. 2009, pp. 314–319.
[4] M. Crocco, M. Cristani, A. Trucco, and V. Murino, “Audio surveillance:
A systematic review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 1–46, 2016.
[5] C. Knapp and G. Carter, “The generalized correlation method for estima-
tion of time delay,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., vol. 24,
no. 4, pp. 320–327, Aug. 1976.
[6] H. Do, H. F. Silverman, and Y. Yu, “A real-time SRP-PHAT source
location implementation using stochastic region contraction (SRC) on a
large-aperture microphone array,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech
Signal Process., 2007, pp. I-121–I-124.
[7] R. Schmidt, “Multiple emitter location and signal parameter estimation,”
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 276–280, Mar. 1986.
[8] J. H. DiBiase, H. F. Silverman, and M. S. Brandstein, “Robust localization
in reverberant rooms,” in Microphone Arrays. Berlin, Germany: Springer,
2001, pp. 157–180.
[9] J. P. Dmochowski and J. Benesty, “Steered beamforming approaches for
acoustic source localization,” in Speech Processing in Modern Communi-
cation. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2010, pp. 307–337.
[10] T. G. Dvorkind and S. Gannot, “Time difference of arrival estimation of
speech source in a noisy and reverberant environment,” Signal Process.,
vol. 85, no. 1, pp. 177–204, Jan. 2005.
[11] A. Levy, S. Gannot, and E. A. P. Habets, “Multiple-hypothesis extended
particle ﬁlter for acoustic source localization in reverberant environments,”
IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1540–1555,
Aug. 2011.
[12] S. Chakrabarty, K. Kowalczyk, M. Taseska, and E. A. P. Habets,
“Extended kalman ﬁlter with probabilistic data association for multiple
non-concurrent speaker localization in reverberant environments,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2014, pp. 7445–7449.
[13] C. Evers, E. A. P. Habets, S. Gannot, and P. A. Naylor, “DoA reliability for
distributed acoustic tracking,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 25, no. 9,
pp. 1320–1324, Sep. 2018.
[14] D. Bechler, M. Grimm, and K. Kroschel, “Speaker tracking with a micro-
phone array using Kalman ﬁltering,” Adv. Radio Sci., vol. 1, pp. 113–117,
May 2003.
[15] D. Salvati, C. Drioli, and G. L. Foresti, “Localization and tracking of an
acoustic source using a diagonal unloading beamforming and a Kalman
ﬁlter,” in Proc. LOCATA Chall. Workshop Satellite Event IWAENC, 2018.
[16] S. Gannot and T. G. Dvorkind, “Microphone array speaker localizers
using spatial-temporal information,” EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process.,
vol. 2006, no. 1, May 2006, Art. no. 059625 .
[17] U. Klee, T. Gehrig, and J. McDonough, “Kalman ﬁlters for time delay
of arrival-based source localization,” EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process.,
vol. 2006, no. 1, Mar. 2006, Art. no. 012378.
[18] Z. Liang, X. Ma, and X. Dai, “Robust tracking of moving sound source
using multiple model Kalman ﬁlter,” Appl. Acoust., vol. 69, no. 12,
pp. 1350–1355, Dec. 2008.
[19] J. Traa and P. Smaragdis, “A wrapped Kalman ﬁlter for azimuthal speaker
tracking,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 1257–1260,
Dec. 2013.
[20] J. Vermaak and A. Blake, “Nonlinear ﬁltering for speaker tracking in noisy
and reverberant environments,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech,
Signal Process., 2001, pp. 3021–3024.
[21] D. Ward, E. Lehmann, and R. Williamson, “Particle ﬁltering algorithms for
tracking an acoustic source in a reverberant environment,” IEEE Speech
Audio Process., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 826–836, Nov. 2003.
[22] Y. Chen and Y. Rui, “Real-time speaker tracking using particle ﬁlter sensor
fusion,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 92, no. 3, pp. 485–494, Mar. 2004.
[23] X. Zhong and J. R. Hopgood, “Nonconcurrent multiple speakers tracking
based on extended Kalman particle ﬁlter,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust.,
Speech Signal Process., Mar. 2008, pp. 293–296.
[24] T. Li and W. Ser, “Three dimensional acoustic source localization and
tracking using statistically weighted hybrid particle ﬁltering algorithm,”
Signal Process., vol. 90, no. 5, pp. 1700–1719, May 2010.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:36:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 14 =====
COHEN et al.: SYNTHETIC APERTURE LOCAL CONFORMAL AUTOENCODER FOR SEMI-SUPERVISED SPEAKER’S DOA TRACKING
2931
[25] N. Roman and D. Wang, “Binaural tracking of multiple moving sources,”
IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 728–739,
May 2008.
[26] K. Weisberg and S. Gannot, “Multiple speaker tracking using coupled
HMM in the STFT domain,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Comput. Adv.
Multi-Sensor Adaptive Process., Dec. 2019, pp. 286–290.
[27] N. T. Pham, W. Huang, and S. H. Ong, “Multiple sensor multiple object
tracking with GMPHD ﬁlter,” in Proc. 10th IEEE Int. Conf. Inf. Fusion,
2007, pp. 1–7.
[28] M. Beard and S. Arulampalam, “Performance of PHD and CPHD ﬁltering
versus JIPDA for bearings-only multi-target tracking,” in Proc. 15th IEEE
Int. Conf. Inf. Fusion, 2012, pp. 542–549.
[29] Q. Liu, W. Wang, T. de Campos, P. J. B. Jackson, and A. Hilton, “Multiple
speaker tracking in spatial audio via PHD ﬁltering and depth-audio fusion,”
IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 1767–1780, Jul. 2018.
[30] Z. Fu, F. Angelini, J. Chambers, and S. M. Naqvi, “Multi-level cooperative
fusion of GM-PHD ﬁlters for online multiple human tracking,” IEEE
Trans. Multimedia, vol. 21, no. 9, pp. 2277–2291, Sep. 2019.
[31] K. Weisberg, B. Laufer-Goldshtein, and S. Gannot, “Simultaneous track-
ing and separation of multiple sources using factor graph model,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 28, pp. 2848–2864,
2020.
[32] O. Schwartz and S. Gannot, “Speaker tracking using recursive EM algo-
rithms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 392–402, Feb. 2014.
[33] D. Giacobello, “An online expectation-maximization algorithm for track-
ing acoustic sources in multi-microphone devices during music playback,”
in Proc. 26th Eur. Signal Process. Conf., 2018, pp. 1547–1551.
[34] Y. Dorfan, A. Plinge, G. Hazan, and S. Gannot, “Distributed expectation-
maximization algorithm for speaker localization in reverberant environ-
ments,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 26, no. 3,
pp. 682–695, Mar. 2018.
[35] X. Li, Y. Ban, L. Girin, X. Alameda-Pineda, and R. Horaud, “Online
localization and tracking of multiple moving speakers in reverberant envi-
ronments,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 88–103,
Mar. 2019.
[36] Y. Dorfan, B. Schwartz, and S. Gannot, “Forward-backward recursive
expectation-maximization for concurrent speaker tracking,” EURASIP J.
Audio, Speech, Music Process., vol. 2021, no. 1, Jan. 2021, Art. no. 2 .
[37] A. Bross and S. Gannot, “Training-based multiple source tracking using
manifold-learning and recursive expectation-maximization,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 31, pp. 1124–1140, Mar. 2023.
[38] S. Chakrabarty and E. A. Habets, “Multi-speaker DOA estimation using
deep convolutional networks trained with noise signals,” IEEE J. Sel.
Topics Signal Process., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 8–21, Mar. 2019.
[39] H. Hammer, S. E. Chazan, J. Goldberger, and S. Gannot, “Dynami-
cally localizing multiple speakers based on the time-frequency domain,”
EURASIP J. Audio, Speech, Music Process., vol. 2021, no. 1, Apr. 2021,
Art. no. 16.
[40] A. Bohlender, A. Spriet, W. Tirry, and N. Madhu, “Exploiting temporal
context in CNN based multisource DOA estimation,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 29, pp. 1594–1608, 2021.
[41] S. Adavanne, A. Politis, and T. Virtanen, “Localization, detection and
tracking of multiple moving sound sources with a convolutional recurrent
neural network,” in Proc. Acoust. Scenes Events Workshop, 2019, pp. 20–
24.
[42] A. Bohlender, L. Roelens, and N. Madhu, “Improved deep speaker local-
ization and tracking: Revised training paradigm and controlled latency,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., Jun. 2023, pp. 1–5.
[43] J. Datta, M. Adams, and C. Perez, “Dense-u-Net assisted localization of
speech sources in motion under reverberant conditions,” in Proc. 12th
IEEE Int. Conf. Control Automat. Inf. Sci., 2023, pp. 440–447.
[44] A. Schwartz, E. Hadad, S. Gannot, and S. E. Chazan, “Array conﬁguration
mismatch in deep DOA estimation: Towards robust training,” in Proc.
IEEE Workshop Appl. Signal Process. to Audio Acoust., New Paltz, USA,
Oct. 2023, pp. 1–5.
[45] B. Laufer-Goldshtein, R. Talmon, and S. Gannot, “Semi-supervised
source localization on multiple manifolds with distributed microphones,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 25, no. 7,
pp. 1477–1491, Jul. 2017, doi: 10.1109/TASLP.2017.2696310.
[46] B. Laufer-Goldshtein, R. Talmon, and S. Gannot, “A hybrid approach for
speaker tracking based on TDOA and data-driven models,” IEEE/ACM
Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 725–735,
Apr. 2018.
[47] M. J. Bianco, S. Gannot, E. Fernandez-Grande, and P. Gerstoft, “Semi-
supervised source localization in reverberant environments with deep
generative modeling,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 84956–84970, 2021.
[48] R. Opochinsky, B. Laufer-Goldshtein, S. Gannot, and G. Chechik, “Deep
ranking-based sound source localization,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Appl.
Signal Process. Audio Acoust., Oct. 2019, pp. 283–287.
[49] R. Opochinsky, G. Chechik, and S. Gannot, “Deep ranking-based DOA
tracking algorithm,” in Proc. 29th Eur. Signal Process. Conf., 2021,
pp. 1020–1024.
[50] P.-A. Grumiaux, S. Kiti´c, L. Girin, and A. Guérin, “A survey of sound
source localization with deep learning methods,” J. Acoustical Soc. Amer-
ica, vol. 152, no. 1, pp. 107–151, 2022.
[51] E. Peterfreund et al., “Local conformal autoencoder for standardized data
coordinates,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 117, no. 49, pp. 30918–30927,
Nov. 2020.
[52] I. Cohen, S. Gannot, and O. Lindenbaum, “Unsupervised acoustic scene
mappingbasedonacousticfeaturesanddimensionalityreduction,”inProc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2024, pp. 386–390.
[53] B. Laufer-Goldshtein, R. Talmon, and S. Gannot, “Semi-supervised sound
source localization based on manifold regularization,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1393–1407, Aug. 2016.
[54] B.Laufer-Goldshtein,R.Talmon,andS.Gannot,“AStudyonManifoldsof
Acoustic Responses,” in Latent Variable Analysis and Signal Separation.
Berlin, Germany: Springer Int. Publishing, 2015, pp. 203–210.
[55] B. Laufer-Goldshtein, R. Talmon, and S. Gannot, “Data-driven multi-
microphone speaker localization on manifolds,” Foundations Trends Sig-
nal Process., vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 1–161, 2020.
[56] J. B. Tenenbaum, V. de Silva, and J. C. Langford, “A global geometric
framework for nonlinear dimensionality reduction,” Science, vol. 290,
no. 5500, pp. 2319–2323, Dec. 2000.
[57] A.SingerandR.R.Coifman,“Non-linearindependentcomponentanalysis
with diffusion maps,” Appl. Comput. Harmon. Anal., vol. 25, no. 2,
pp. 226–239, Sep. 2008.
[58] W. M. Brown, “Synthetic aperture radar,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron.
Syst., vol. AES- 3, no. 2, pp. 217–229, Mar. 1967.
[59] Y. Deville and M. Puigt, “Temporal and time-frequency correlation-based
blind source separation methods. part I: Determined and underdeter-
mined linear instantaneous mixtures,” Signal Process., vol. 87, no. 3,
pp. 374–407, 2007.
[60] S. Rickard and O. Yilmaz, “On the approximate W-disjoint orthogonality
of speech,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech, Signal Process.,
2002, pp. I-529–I-532.
[61] S. Arberet, R. Gribonval, and F. Bimbot, “A robust method to count and
locate audio sources in a multichannel underdetermined mixture,” IEEE
Trans. Signal Process., vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 121–133, Jan. 2010.
[62] C. Blandin, A. Ozerov, and E. Vincent, “Multi-source TDOA estimation in
reverberant audio using angular spectra and clustering,” Signal Process.,
vol. 92, no. 8, pp. 1950–1960, 2012.
[63] D. Pavlidi, A. Grifﬁn, M. Puigt, and A. Mouchtaris, “Real-time multiple
sound source localization and counting using a circular microphone array,”
IEEETrans.Audio,Speech,Lang.Process.,vol.21,no.10,pp. 2193–2206,
Oct. 2013.
[64] J. Garofolo et al., “Darpa timit acoustic-phonetic continuous speech corpus
CD-ROM,” NIST Interagency/Internal Rep. (NISTIR), Nat. Inst. Stand.
Technol., Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 1993.
[65] Y. Lee, S. Yoon, M. Son, and F. C. Park, “Regularized autoencoders for
isometric representation learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representa-
tions, 2022.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:36:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
