

===== PAGE 1 =====
Comparative analysis of EKF and Particle Filter
performance for an acoustic tracking system for
AUVs exploiting bearing-only measurements
Matteo Bresciani
Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione
Universit`a di Pisa and ISME, Italy
matteo.bresciani@phd.unipi.it
Riccardo Costanzi
Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione
and Centro di Ricerca ”E. Piaggio”
Universit`a di Pisa and ISME, Italy
riccardo.costanzi@unipi.it
Vincenzo Manzari
Naval Experimentation and Support Centre of Italian Navy
La Spezia, Italy
vincenzo.manzari@marina.difesa.it
Giovanni Peralta
Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione
Universit`a di Pisa and ISME, Italy
giovanni.peralta@phd.unipi.it
Daniele S. Terracciano
Naval Experimentation and Support Centre of Italian Navy
and Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione
Universit`a di Pisa, Italy
daniele.terracciano@ing.unipi.it
Andrea Caiti
Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione
and Centro di Ricerca ”E. Piaggio”
Universit`a di Pisa and ISME, Italy
andrea.caiti@unipi.it
Abstract—This paper aims to compare different navigation
state estimation approaches for the tracking of an Autonomous
Underwater Vehicle (AUV) based on Direction of Arrival (DoA)
measurements. The use of passive acoustic devices to compute
the DoA information allows for a high rate (up to 1Hz in
the proposed tests) of the measurements while the AUV moves
underwater. The informative content of these data integrated
with the synchronised data of the on-board sensors allows for a
ﬁne tracking of the vehicle under test for navigation performance
evaluation. The paper addresses the issue of the selection of the
proper data ﬁltering strategy for the estimation of the navigation
state of the AUV. In particular, it investigates whether the
adoption of a Particle Filter (PF) has signiﬁcant advantages with
respect to a classical approach based on an Extended Kalman
Filter (EKF). The two approaches exploit the same models and
parameters to limit the comparison to the ﬁltering strategy.
The ground truth is the GPS signal provided by the receiver
integrated within the antenna on the AUV under test. The
comparative analysis considers both the estimation performance
and the computation load. Results are extensively provided for
a subset of all the processed dataset, all the remaining part of
data conﬁrm the reported analysis.
Index Terms—Kalman ﬁlter, Particle ﬁlter, Autonomous Un-
derwater Vehicles, Acoustic tracking system, Bearing-only mea-
surements, Acoustic Modems, USBL
I. INTRODUCTION
Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) are nowadays
widely used in marine applications, thanks to the technological
progress over the years that has made such vehicles easier to
use and less expensive than in the past. The absence of GPS
in sub-sea scenarios affects the vehicle underwater navigation
performance which negatively impacts the goodness of the
sub-sea gathered data. For this reason, the underwater vehicle
localisation is a very challenging topic. In literature, a lot
of research works deal with this issue. A review of the
state of the art of AUV navigation and localisation can be
found in [1], where the Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) and
Particle Filter (PF) approaches are presented in Simultaneous
Localisation and Mapping (SLAM) applications. Different PF
applications can be found in [2] and [3]. The work presented
in [2] shows a PF approach based on time difference of arrival
(TDOA) of acoustic signals from beacons around a robot.
Reference [3] exploits environment semantic information
to extend the standard particle ﬁlter approach. In previous
works of the authors, target tracking algorithms based on
bearing only measurements provided by Ultra-Short Baselines
(USBLs) sensors and calibration procedure of an acoustic
tracking system have been implemented, in order to verify the
vehicle conformity with long term underwater navigation. In
particular, the authors aimed at creating an Underwater Test
Range (UTR) system for underwater vehicles. This system is
in charge of tracking the vehicle position using ﬁlters which
expoloit Direction of Arrival (DoA) measures provided by
USBLs. The tracking system is detailed in [4], and the utilised
calibration procedure utilised is presented in [5]. In a further
past work, the authors have used the Unscented Kalman Filter
(UKF) based approach for resolving the localisation issue in
the UTR system [6]. The purpose of this work is to compare
EKF and PF state estimation approaches for AUV tracking
 
 
978-1-7281-5446-6/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE
Global Oceans 2020: Singapore - U.S. Gulf Coast | 978-1-7281-5446-6/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IEEECONF38699.2020.9389288
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:37:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 2 =====
using DoA measurements. The choice of these ﬁlters is due to
the non-linearity of the problem. In addition, the chosen ﬁlters
are widely used for localisation problems both in maritime
and non-maritime scenarios. In this paper, the measurements
from two USBL devices have been utilised. These devices
have been used only as passive sensors, in order to detect the
vehicle transmitted signals. In this way the USBLs provide
only DOA measures. The advantage of this conﬁguration is
the high vehicle ping rate which guarantees frequent DoA
observations. The experimental campaign planned in order to
acquire the exploited data, was performed on March 2019 in
La Spezia (Italy) using an eFolaga AUV.
The paper is structured as follows: section II presents the
navigation model, section III describes the experimental setup
used during the sea test, section IV reports the comparison
results in terms of computational time, position, velocity and
drift estimation goodness and ﬁnally section V summarises
conclusions.
II. MODELS
In this work, the localisation problem is limited to the
horizontal plane thanks to the reliable depth measurements
provided by the sensor installed on the vehicle. The state used
for the estimation ﬁlters is composed of:
• pnorth, the position of the vehicle along the North direc-
tion in a NED reference frame;
• peast, the position of the vehicle along the East direction
in a NED reference frame;
• v, the speed of the vehicle along the course direction;
• δ, the drift of the vehicle, which is the angle between
heading and course directions;
Thus, the state vector can be expressed as:
x = [pnorth, peast, v, δ]T ∈R4
The model has as inputs the heading measurements provided
by the magnetic compass, which is used in the ﬁlters prediction
step. The state-transition model represents a model with slowly
variable speed along the course axis and is deﬁned by the
following equations:









pnorthk+1
= pnorthk + v cos(ψ + δ) dT
peastk+1
= peastk + v sin(ψ + δ) dT
vk+1
= wvk dT
δk+1
= wδk dT
(1)
where ψ is the heading angle used as input, wv and wδ are the
white Gaussian process noise which characterise the derivative
with respect to the time of the state respective component. The
time interval dT has a value of 0.1s, as the ﬁlter loop rate
is 10Hz, which corresponds to the maximum vehicle sensor
acquisition rate.
The observation model, which exploits the DoA measurements
provided by two USBLs, is:
h = atan2(peast −seast, pnorth −snorth)
(2)
where atan2 returns the four-quadrant inverse tangent, snorth
and seast are the positions of the USBL providing measures
in NED reference frame, obtained through the calibration
procedure presented in [5] . In the EKF the observation
model is used in the correction step; in the PF the DoA
measurements are exploited to compute the likelihood of each
particle within each correction step and to consequently update
their associated weights.
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Operational scenario
This investigation was performed in post-processing, ex-
ploiting part of the dataset acquired during a campaign per-
formed in La Spezia (Italy) during March 2019 at the SEALab,
the joint research laboratory between the Inter-university Cen-
ter of Integrated Systems for the Marine Environment (ISME),
of which University of Pisa (UNIPI) is a co-founder, and the
Naval Support and Experimentation Centre of Italian Navy
(CSSN).
The working area is an artiﬁcial basin between two piers,
within which two USBLs have been deployed as DoA sensors.
It is a challenging environment from an acoustic point of view
because of the very shallow water and the proximity to the
quayside which frequently cause the multi-path phenomena
generating unreliable measurements.
Fig. 1: Working area in green with the position of the two
USBL devices
Figure 1 shows the operational scenario and the USBL
devices positions. The green polygon represented in the ﬁgure
deﬁnes the working area where the vehicle was moving during
the tests.
B. Equipment setup
The trials were carried out using the eFolaga AUV [1],
showed in Figure 2, a torpedo-shape vehicle made up of a
pair of ﬁbreglass cylinders connected to two terminating wet
sections where propelling thrusters and pump jets are located,
together with a bladder enabling variations of the vehicle
buoyancy. For these trials the vehicle was equipped with: depth
sensor, compass, 2D inclinometer and a GPS. All the sensors
data are collected at a rate of 10 Hz, except for the GPS
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:37:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 3 =====
Fig. 2: eFolaga AUV
which provides measures at 1 Hz. The vehicle was able to
communicate with the USBL devices thanks to an acoustic
modem (Evologics S2C M 18/34) integrated on-board. The
acoustic tracking system, was composed of two DoA sensors,
in order to track the vehicle. During the tests, the DoA sensors
involved were USBL devices deployed in known position on
the seaﬂoor properly calibrated in post-processing to determi-
nate their attitude [5]. The vehicle, equipped with a compliant
modem, was programmed to transmit in broadcast acoustic
packets containing current timestamp with a frequency of 1
Hz. The USBL devices receiving the message are likely able
to compute the DoA, and to associate the vehicle timestamp to
the measurements by reading the content of the message. Thus,
this information can be easily synchronised in post-processing
with other data collected on-board the vehicle thanks to the
timestamp encoded in the acoustic messages.
C. Mission description
In this work the dataset is used for the comparison analysis.
Such dataset was acquired during the test performed in the sce-
nario detailed in III-A with the equipment presented in III-B,
is used for the comparison analysis. This dataset is composed
of six different missions that include similar manoeuvres, in
order to carry out a consistent analysis.
Figure 3 shows an example of trajectory, displaying the
GPS measurements, performed by the vehicle in the missions
analysed. The position estimation are performed exploiting
missions containing vehicle trajectories on the surface, in order
to utilise as ground truth the available latitude and longitude
measurements provided by the GPS device mounted on the
vehicle.
IV. RESULTS
The authors aim to evaluate the performances of EKF
and PF ﬁlters in terms of computational time and estimation
performance. The estimation evaluation is based on the subset
of missions that took place on the surface. The GPS mea-
surements available for these missions have not considered
within the ﬁlters, except for the initialisation, but have been
used as Ground Truth to quantify the estimation performance.
The comparative analysis is carried out estimating the state
vector by varying: particles number in the PF, missions and
Fig. 3: Example of mission
process noise on the drift state in both EKF and PF ﬁlters. In
particular:
• mission: in order to get a clearer picture of the perfor-
mance of the two ﬁlters, six different missions, presented
in the subsection III-C, are used. All of these are extracted
from the investigation detailed in the subsection III-A
performed with the equipment showed in the subsection
III-B. Each mission represent a different vehicle trajec-
tory, performed in the same conditions.
• process noise on the drift: the values (expressed in
deg/s) imposed on the drift standard deviation are,
δstd dev = [3, 5, 10, 15]
(3)
• number of particles: in the PF the number of particles
vary as follows,
#particles = [500, 1000, 3000, 5000]
(4)
The state estimated by each ﬁlter, and the corresponding
computational time, for each conﬁguration of parameters, were
stored and post-analysed in order to extract information in
terms of quality, robustness and efﬁciency. In this section the
results relating to the performed analysis will be presented. For
space issues, only two missions will be shown, as the results
obtained are similar for all six missions of the analysed dataset
A. Position estimation error analysis
The position estimation error is evaluated through the Root
Mean Square Error (RMSE) respect to GPS measurements in
meters and evaluating the estimation error over the time, also
in meters, for each mission and each possible combination of
the parameters deﬁned above.
Figure 4, 5, 6 and 7 show the estimation error over the
time of EKF (in black in the ﬁgure) and PF (in red in the
ﬁgure) with respect to GPS measurements used as reference,
in two different conditions of the process noise on the drift
state. These plots show a PF performance improvement when
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:37:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 4 =====
Fig. 4: Mission 1. Error over the time of EKF and PF
estimation compared with the GPS ground truth. The process
noise on the drift is 3 deg/s. The number of particles is 1000.
Fig. 5: Mission 1. Error over the time of EKF and PF
estimation compared with the GPS ground truth. The process
noise on the drift is 15 deg/s. The number of particles is 1000.
Fig. 6: Mission 2. Error over the time of EKF and PF
estimation compared with the GPS ground truth. The process
noise on the drift is 3 deg/s. The number of particles is 1000.
Fig. 7: Mission 2. Error over the time of EKF and PF
estimation compared with the GPS ground truth. The process
noise on the drift is 15 deg/s. The number of particles is 1000.
the process noise on the drift increases. In fact, the average
RMSE of the PF estimation is lower when the drift standard
deviation is 15 deg
s
(ﬁgures 5 and 7). In the reported cases
the standard deviation of the drift noise are 3 and 15
deg
s
respectively. In this paper, the data of only two mission are
reported, but this trend has been veriﬁed in all the six missions
in the analysed dataset.
(a) Stems of absolute value of the difference between RMSE for each
conﬁguration
(b) Table representing the lower RMSE
for each conﬁguration
Fig. 8: Mission 1. RMSE for each conﬁguration correlated by
an illustrative table.
Figure 8 and 9 report the absolute value of the difference
between the EKF and PF RMSE on the vehicle position and
a table which quantiﬁes the lower RMSE value for each
conﬁguration, for mission 1 and 2 respectively. The cases in
which the EKF estimates are better than the ones obtained
through the PF are displayed in black, the others in red. Also
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:37:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 5 =====
(a) Stems of absolute value of the difference between RMSE for each
conﬁguration
(b) Table representing the lower RMSE
for each conﬁguration
Fig. 9: Mission 2. RMSE for each conﬁguration correlated by
an illustrative table.
this kind of data analysis based on the RMSE reveals the same
trend: the PF performance increases when the process noise
on the drift augments.
B. Drift and velocity analysis
In this subsection the estimation of the drift and velocity
state by varying the process noise on the drift will be reported.
Since the evolution of drift and velocity are similar by varying
the missions, the results of only one is shown. Figures 10 and
11 show the evolution of the drift estimation, for EKF and PF
respectively, by varying the process noise on the drift. Under
the same process noise conditions, the drift estimated by the
PF has greater ﬂuctuations with respect to the one estimated
by the EKF. Figures 12 and 13 instead, show that this aspect
is not found in the velocity estimation evolution. Indeed, the
two estimated velocity plots (EKF in ﬁgure 12) and (PF in
ﬁgure 13) have the same trend.
C. Computational time analysis
This subsection will report an efﬁciency analysis in term
of computational time between for EKF and PF ﬁlters. This
analysis has been performed using a machine with an Intel
Core i7-8550U CPU @1.99GHz in MATLAB environment.
The time analysis, reported in ﬁgure 14, represents the time
required, for both ﬁlters, to estimates the vehicle positions of
the entire considered mission. The ﬁlter estimations reported
are composed of 943 prediction steps and 89 correction steps.
The computation time measured, and showed in ﬁgure 14, are:
• EKF: 0.169 seconds
• PF with 500 particles: 0.743 seconds
• PF with 1000 particles: 1.071 seconds
• PF with 3000 particles: 1.517 seconds
• PF with 5000 particles: 1.989 seconds
Fig. 10: EKF estimation drift plot over the time by varying
the noise on the drift.
Fig. 11: PF estimation drift plot over the time by varying the
noise on the drift. The particle number is set to 1000.
Fig. 12: EKF estimation velocity plot over the time by varying
the noise on the drift.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:37:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 6 =====
Fig. 13: PF estimation velocity plot over the time by varying
the noise on the drift. The particle number is set to 1000.
Fig. 14: Computational time analysis
As expected, EKF has higher performance than PF from a
computational time point of view, and the process time of the
PF augments when increasing the particles number. This result
is also obtained from the analysis of all the other missions in
the considered dataset; detailed results of only one mission are
reported because of space issues.
V. CONCLUSIONS
A performance comparison between the Extended Kalman
Filter and the Particle Filter has been reported in this paper
for the particular scenario of AUV tracking in terms of trajec-
tory estimation errors and computational time. This analysis
revealed, as expected, a signiﬁcant difference in favour of the
EKF from the computational time point of view. Such disparity
has been quantiﬁed for different numbers of particles in the
PF. From a trajectory estimation point of view, the reported
analysis, based on the RMSE, highlights a trend according
to which the PF tends to improve as the standard deviation
of the process noise on the drift state component increases.
The difference on the RMSE always in the order of 10−2
meters does not suggest particular advantages in the use of
an approach with respect to the other one for the speciﬁc
application and scenario.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank all the SEALab members,
the joint applied research lab oratory between the Naval Sup-
port and Experimentation Center (CSSN) of the Italian Navy
and the Italian Inter-university Research Center of Integrated
Systems for Marine Environment (ISME), who supported the
research team during the missions at sea.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Paull, S. Saeedi, M. Seto and H. Li, ”AUV Navigation and Localiza-
tion: A Review”, in IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, vol. 39, no.
1, pp. 131-149, January, 2014.
[2] N. Y. Ko, T. G. Kim, Y. S. Moon, ”Particle ﬁlter approach for localization
of an underwater robot using time difference of arrival”, Oceans-Yeosu
(pp. 1-7). IEEE, 2012.
[3] F. Maurelli, S. Krupiski, ”A Semantic-Aided Particle Filter Approach
for AUV Localization,” OCEANS - MTS/IEEE Kobe Techno-Oceans
(OTO), Kobe, pp. 1-5, 2018.
[4] R. Costanzi, D. Fenucci, V. Manzari, A. Caiti, R. Petroccia, ”Towards
an autonomous underwater vehicles test range: At-sea experimentation
of bearing-only tracking algorithms”, Annual Reviews in Control, vol.
46, pp. 304 - 314, 2018.
[5] M. Bresciani, R. Costanzi, V. Manzari, D. Terracciano, ”Acoustic
tracking system for AUVs exploiting DoA sensors - calibration and
performance characterisation”, IFAC CAMS, Daejeon, September 18-
20, 2019.
[6] R. Costanzi, D. Fenucci, V. Manzari, A. Caiti, ”Bearing-only UV
tracking performance: Unscented Kalman Filter estimation against un-
certainty in underwater nodes position”, IFAC 2017.
[7] A. Alvarez, et al. ”Folaga: A low-cost autonomous underwater vehicle
combining glider and AUV capabilities.” Ocean Engineering 36.1: 24-
38, 2009.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:37:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
