

===== PAGE 1 =====
MULTI-SPEAKER DOA TRACKING ALGORITHM UTILIZING PROBABILITY
HYPOTHESIS DENSITY FILTER AND WEIGHTED HISTOGRAM OF SRP-PHAT
Yosef Soussana, Elior Hadad, and Sharon Gannot
Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, 5290002, Israel
{Yosef.sussana, Elior.Hadad, Sharon.Gannot}@biu.ac.il
ABSTRACT
This contribution presents a concurrent speakers’ direction of
arrival (DOA) tracking algorithm in reverberant environments. The
algorithm is formulated in two stages, leveraging speech sparsity in
the short-time Fourier transform (STFT) domain. In the first stage,
sets of DOAs per batch of time frames are computed. Initially, a
single narrow-band (NB) DOA per time-frequency (TF) bin is se-
lected using the W-disjoint orthogonality property of speech. The
NB DOA is obtained as the maximum of the steered response power
phase transform (SRP-PHAT) localization spectrum at that TF bin,
together with a quality measure describing the confidence in the es-
timation. A localization spectrum is obtained by combining the NB
DOAs using a weighted histogram, with the quality measures serv-
ing as weights. The set of DOAs is determined by identifying peaks
in the resulting localization spectrum. The collection of DOAs is
modeled as a random finite set (RFS). In the second stage, the proba-
bility hypothesis density (PHD) filter is applied to estimate and track
the speakers’ DOAs over a collection of batches. Information from
the first stage is utilized to calculate prior knowledge on the appear-
ance of new speakers. Our experimental study demonstrates the su-
periority of the proposed algorithm over a baseline approach.
1. INTRODUCTION
Speaker localization and tracking play a crucial role in various
audio applications, including hearing aids, surveillance systems,
and robot audition. Commonly used sound source localizer (SSL)
techniques include the generalized cross correlation (GCC)-based
methods [1], steered response power (SRP)-based methods (such as
SRP-PHAT [2], which is obtained from SRP by applying a phase
transform (PHAT) whitening), and maximum likelihood estima-
tion (MLE)-based methods [3, 4]. Nevertheless, the effectiveness
of these methods significantly degrades when speakers are concur-
rently active and in reverberant environments, both of which are
typical of real-world situations.
In scenarios involving concurrent speakers, speech sources can
be assumed to exhibit disjoint activity in the short-time Fourier trans-
form (STFT) domain (the so-called W-disjoint orthogonality prop-
erty [5]). According to this property, each time-frequency (TF) bin
can be associated with a dominant speaker originating from a spe-
cific direction of arrival (DOA), which we denote narrow-band (NB)
DOA estimate. Several two-stage SRP-based techniques were em-
ployed to estimate the NB DOAs [6–10]. In [7], it was proposed first
to estimate single NB DOA by identifying the DOA associated with
the highest value in NB SRP-PHAT localization spectrum. Then, a
localization spectrum was computed by creating a histogram of the
NB DOAs, with confidence measures serving as weights. The DOAs
were determined by identifying peaks in the localization spectrum.
A similar approach was proposed in [11], where the NB DOA was
estimated using the MLE procedure. The accuracy of the DOA local-
ization improves when the number of STFT time-frames increases.
In dynamic scenarios, this problem becomes even more prominent.
In a dynamic scenario, tracking becomes essential. A multichan-
nel extension of [12] was proposed in [13]. The tracking abilities
were obtained by employing two alternative recursive EM (REM)
procedures [14,15].
The probability hypothesis density (PHD) filter is a recursive
Bayesian filter that propagates the first-order moment of the p.d.f.,
also known as intensity, of the random finite set (RFS) of state in
time [16]. This approximation was suggested in multi-speaker track-
ing scenarios to alleviate the computational intractability. The PHD
filter is applied to the single-speaker state space and circumvents the
combinatorial problem that arises from data association. In [17], the
authors presented an analytical solution to the PHD recursion for the
case of linear Gaussian dynamics in a multiple-target scenario. It
was shown that when the initial prior intensity is a mixture of Gaus-
sians (MoG), the posterior intensity at any subsequent time step is
also a MoG.
In the current contribution, we propose a two-stage algorithm
designed for SSL and tracking problems, tailored to dynamic and
multi-speaker scenarios. In the first stage a batch DOAs are com-
puted as described hereafter. Initially, single NB DOA estimates
are computed by selecting the DOA corresponding to the maximum
value in the NB SRP-PHAT spectrum. Following the approach de-
scribed in [7], a quality measure is calculated for each NB DOA,
providing confidence for the estimated decision. Next, a localiza-
tion spectrum for a batch of STFT time-frames is computed. This
batch localization spectrum is obtained by combining the weighted
NB DOAs using the weighted histogram, where the quality mea-
sures serve as weights. Finally, the batch DOAs are determined by
identifying peaks in the resulting batch localization spectrum. In the
second stage, RFSs of candidate DOAs, obtained from the batch lo-
calization spectrum by the application of a threshold, are fed into the
PHD filter with batch confidence, which serves as a prior informa-
tion in order to manage and track the unknown number of speakers
and overcome spectrum detection errors. These errors may occur in
the first stage due to small batch size or spontaneous errors caused
by reverberation. Thanks to the PHD filter, we increase the tracking
ability while working with noisier input data.
2. PROBLEM FORMULATION
Consider an M-microphone array receiving signals from Q con-
current speakers in a noisy and reverberant environment.
Let
Zm(ℓ, k) be the signals received by the mth microphone (located at
(xm, ym)). The signals in the STFT domain are given by:
Zm(ℓ, k) =
Q
X
q=1
Am,q(k) Sq(ℓ, k) + Vm(ℓ, k),
(1)
334
979-8-3503-6185-8/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE
IWAENC 2024
2024 18th International Workshop on Acoustic Signal Enhancement (IWAENC) | 979-8-3503-6185-8/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IWAENC61483.2024.10693986
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 2 =====
where ℓ
=
0, . . . , L −1 denotes the frame-index and k
=
0, . . . , K −1 the frequency index. Am,q(k) denotes the relative
transfer function (RTF) associated with source q, which relates the
m-th microphone and the reference microphone, Sq(ℓ, k) denotes
the speech signal uttered by source q as received by the reference
microphone, and Vm(ℓ, k) denotes the ambient noise.
In this work, we only localize in the azimuthal direction, θ ∈
Θ = {0◦, 180◦}, where θ is measured with respect to the array
axis. The time difference of arrival (TDOA) of the source signal at
the mth microphone with respect to the reference microphone can
be expressed as τm(θ) =
dx
m cos θ+dy
m sin θ
c
, where c is the sound
velocity and dx
m = xm −xr and dy
m = ym −yr are the distances
between the mth microphone and the reference microphone r.
The relative direct transfer function (RDTF) with respect to θ is
defined as
dθ(k) =
 D1(k)
. . .
DM(k) ⊤,
(2)
where Dm(k) = e−ι 2πk
K
τm(θ)
Ts
and Ts denotes the sampling period.
We define a grid of J DOA candidates θ ∈Θ for the localization
spectrum. Each direction is associated with the respective RDTF
dθ(k). The NB SRP-PHAT spectrum is given by [2,7]:1
J (θ; ℓ, k) =
M
X
m=1
M
X
n=1
Zm(ℓ, k)Z∗
n(ℓ, k)
|Zm(ℓ, k)||Zn(ℓ, k)|eι 2πk
K
τm−τn
Ts
.
(3)
3. BATCH DIRECTION OF ARRIVAL LOCALIZATION
In the next sections, the proposed tracking algorithm is presented.
This section introduces the batch DOA procedure, which provides a
set of DOAs for each batch of time-frames. Then, in Section 4, the
derivation of the PHD tracker is provided.
The batch DOA estimation task is formulated through the fol-
lowing steps, as described in [7]. Initially, single NB DOA estimates
are computed by selecting the DOA corresponding to the maximum
value in the NB SRP-PHAT spectrum in (3), i.e.,
ˆθ(ℓ, k) = arg max
θ
J (θ; ℓ, k).
(4)
A quality measure is calculated for each NB DOA, providing confi-
dence for the estimated decision. We used a directivity-based confi-
dence measure, which is defined as the peak value of the NB local-
ization spectrum (associated with the selected NB DOA), normalized
by a summation of all grid points of the localization spectrum:
wD(ˆθ(ℓ, k)) =
J (ˆθ(ℓ, k), ℓ, k)
PJ
j′=1 J (θj′; ℓ, k)
.
(5)
Clearly, as wD(ˆθ(ℓ, k)) increases, the estimated NB DOA becomes
more dominant with respect to the other examined directions. This
value is influenced by both the geometry and the reverberation level.
Next, a localization spectrum for a batch of STFT time-frames is
computed. The indicator u(j, ℓ, k) associates each TF bin with a
single source emitting from angle θj; i.e.,
u(j, ℓ, k) =

1
ˆθ(ℓ, k) = θj
0
otherwise
;
(6)
1The conventional wide-band SRP-PHAT localization spectrum is com-
puted by averaging the NB SRP-PHAT localization spectrum across all ex-
amined TF bins. This process allows us to estimate the wide-band DOAs by
identifying the peaks in the wide-band SRP-PHAT localization spectrum.
such that the indicator u(j, ℓ, k) is equal to 1 only when the NB DOA
estimate ˆθ(ℓ, k) is equal to θj in the respective TF bin. The batch
localization spectrum is defined as a weighted histogram of the NB
DOAs over a sliding window of length B time-frames, and with the
confidence measures wD(ˆθ(ℓ, k)) as weights:
Ψb(θj) =
ℓb+B
X
ℓ=ℓb
K−1
X
k=0
wD(ˆθ(ℓ, k))u(j, ℓ, k).
(7)
Finally, a set of batch DOAs are determined by identifying the peaks
of the corresponding batch localization spectrum Ψb(θj), j
=
1, . . . , J. Furthermore, a batch confidence measure is calculated
for each batch DOA. This confidence measure is used in the track-
ing phase alongside the candidate DOAs, Ωb and serving as prior
information:
vi
b =
Ψb(θi)
P
θ∈Ωb Ψb(θ).
(8)
Now, this measure reflects the dominance of the ith DOA relative to
other estimated DOAs within the same batch. This resulting value
serves as prior information necessary for the GM-PHD filter, as ex-
plained in Section 4.3.1.
4. GM-PHD DOA TRACKING
To fully characterize the statistical properties of an active speaker
DOA, its posterior p.d.f. should be estimated and propagated in time.
SSL may include an unknown number of speakers in the enclosure,
and hence, tracking of multiple sources is required. For multi-source
tracking, however, the p.d.f. is numerically intractable. Rather than
propagating the p.d.f., the posterior can be approximated by its first-
order moment, which is known as the intensity function. In [17],
the Gaussian mixture probability hypothesis density (GM-PHD)
filter and the associated recursive equations were developed under
the Gaussian linear motion assumption for multi-target tracking in
surveillance systems applications. In this study, we utilize the the
GM-PHD filter framework proposed in [17], to estimate the DOA for
unknown number of speakers. In our study, we propose calculating
new prior information for each recursion step, which is essential for
the GM-PHD filter. This new prior information is based on the DOA
estimator, introduced in Section 3. In the following subsections,
the speakers’ state-space model (Section 4.1), measurement model
(Section 4.2), and the filtering recursion (Section 4.3) are described.
4.1. State space model
This subsection describes the RFS model with batch evolution for
the multi-speaker DOAs state. The model integrates the dynamic
changes in the active speaker’s DOA along with the addition or re-
moval of a source. Speaker state xb−1 at batch index b −1 com-
prises the speaker DOA and the angular velocity denoted by [θ, ρ]⊤,
respectively.
Conditioned on the existence of an arbitrary state speaker for
batch b, the p.d.f. of a transition from state xb−1 to state xb is given
by f(xb|xb−1). The state transition is governed by a linear dynamic
model [17](see Eq.(17)) and can expressed by the following distri-
bution:
f(xb|xb−1) = N(xb; Fxb−1, Q)
(9)
with F =

1
∆
0
1

and Q = σ2
ϕ
"
∆4
4
∆3
2
∆3
2
∆2
#
, are the dynamic
motion model and the process noise, respectively, and ∆is the time
335
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 3 =====
difference between two adjacent batches. Each xb−1 can be either
active at the following batch, b, with probability ps, or inactive with
probability 1 −ps, and Xb−1 is the RFS of all speaker states in
the enclosure at batch index b −1. Consequently, for a given state
xb−1 ∈Xb−1 at batch b −1, its behavior at the next batch is also
modeled as an RFS denoted Sb|b−1(xb−1). For given multi-speaker
states Xb−1, the following batch states space Xb is formulated as
Xb =

[
ζ∈Xb−1
Sb|b−1(ζ)

∪Γb,
(10)
obtained by the union of the active speakers that remain active from
the previous batch and the RFS of the new speaker’s appearance, Γb,
in the current batch. The intesity model of Γb will be described in
Section 4.3.1.
4.2. Measurements model
Since the number of speakers is unknown, similar to the state space
model, the measurement state at each batch index is described as an
RFS as follows.
Let the measurements set Ωb at batch index b, consist of Jb
DOAs, Ωb ≜

θ(j)
b
	Jb
j=1. Each measurement θ(j)
b , resulting in from
either speaker or clutter caused by reverberation, is modeled as a
linear Gaussian measurement:
g(θ(j)
b |x) ∼N(θ(j)
b ; Hx, σ2
r),
(11)
where H = [1, 0] is the observation matrix. The measurement noise
variance σ2
r, can be deduced from the DOA estimator presented in
Section 3. The multi-source measurement process, taking into ac-
count both the speakers’ DOA detection, missed detection, and the
clutter due to reverberation, is also modeled as RFS
Ωb =
 [
x∈Xb
D(x)

∪Cb,
(12)
where Cb are noisy mesurments, with uniform intensity over DOA
region, together with the detection RFS govenerd by MoG inten-
sity D(x). When active speaker with state x(j)
b
is detected then
D(x(j)
b ) = θ(j)
b
otherwise D(x(j)
b ) = ∅.
4.3. GM-PHD recursion for DOA tracking
This subsection describes the recursion process of the GM-PHD fil-
ter. This PHD recursion is applied for propagating the posterior in-
tensity, λb(x), which is modeled as MoG.
4.3.1. Prediction step
The predicted DOA’s intensity, λb|b−1 of the state x at batch index
b, is given by [17]
λb|b−1(x) = λS,b|b−1(x) + γb(x),
(13)
where γb(x) is the prior information for the appearance of a new
speaker in the enclosure, initialized at batch index b, and λS,b|b−1(x)
is the predicted intensity of a continuing speaker from batch index
b −1. Each DOA measurement can arise from an existing speaker, a
new speaker, or noise. The new speaker’s prior intensity is modeled
as MoG, where each DOA from the measurement set Ωb determines
the mean of a single mixture. Additionally, the mixture weight cor-
responds to the batch confidence value (8):
γb(x) =
Jb
X
j=1
vj
bN(x; [θ(j)
b ; 0]⊤, Pb),
(14)
where vj
b is the j-th measurement confidence and Pb ≜

σ2
r
0
0
σ2
a

is the covariance matrix, with the DOA measurement error and an-
gular velocity variance σ2
a. The initial angular velocity is assumed
to be zero. This prior is calculated at each recursion step, in contrast
to [17], where fixed prior intensity for the new appearance is used.
Since the measurements also play a role in the update step of the
algorithm, we use a softened version of γb(x). We apply a simple
pruning procedure for the mixture γb(x) with the previous update
intensity, λb−1. Recalling [17], λS,b|b−1(x) also has a MoG form:
λS,b|b−1(x) =
Jb−1
X
j=1
w(j)
S,b−1N(x; m(j)
S,b−1, P(j)
S,b−1)
(15)
where Jb−1 is the number of MoG components at batch b −1
with weights w(j)
S,b−1 = psw(j)
b−1, normalized by the probability of
the speaker to continue. The means and covariances of this MoG,
m(j)
S,b−1, P(j)
S,b−1, are calculated using the Kalman filter prediction
equations [17] (see Eqs. (26)(27)).
As both the new speaker intensity γb(x) and the surviving
speaker’s intensity are defined, we can express the predicted inten-
sity of the DOA’s as the sum of the two MoG:
λb|b−1(x) =
Jb|b−1
X
j=1
w(j)
b|b−1N(x; m(j)
b|b−1, P(j)
b|b−1)
(16)
where Jb|b−1 = Jb + Jb−1 is the predicted number of speakers with
the corresponding means and covariances m(j)
b|b−1, P(j)
b|b−1, compris-
ing both the continuing and new speaker’s DOA.
4.3.2. Update step
The updated DOA’s intensity, λb(x), also known as the posterior, is
inferred from the measurements, taking into account the predicted
DOA intensity λb|b−1(x). As described in [17], the updated inten-
sity is a summation of two mixtures. The first is considered as the
miss-detection of any predicted intensity λb|b−1(x) component, and
the second is an updated version of the predicted intensity λb|b−1(x)
with measurements:
λb(x) = (1 −PD)λb|b−1(x) +
X
θ∈Ωb
λD,b(x, θ),
(17)
where
λD,b(x, θ) =
Jb|b−1
X
i=1
wi
b(θ)N(x; m(i)
b|b(θ), P(i)
b|b).
(18)
The DOA measurements, Ωb, are taken into account in (18), and
each θ ∈Ωb is associated with the predicted Gaussian’s mean com-
ponents of a MoG with Jb|b−1 components with following weight
value:
wi
b(θ) =
PDw(i)
b|b−1q(i)
b (θ)
κ(θ) + PD
PJb|b−1
l=1
w(l)
b|b−1q(l)
b (θ)
.
(19)
336
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 4 =====
where q(i)
b (θ) is attributed to a single measurement p.d.f., according
to the predicted DOA intensity with detector uncertainty:
q(i)
b (θ) = N(θ; Hm(i)
b|b−1, σ2
r + HP(i)
b|b−1H⊤).
(20)
Note that in the denominator of (19), the noise intensity is taken into
account, given by κ(θ) = ρkU(θ), where ρk is the average num-
ber of false detection due to reverberation and U(θ) is the uniform
density over DOA space.
The MoG means and covariances, m(i)
b|b, P(i)
b|b, respectively, are
calculated with the Kalman filters equations and formulated in [17]
(see Eqs. (34-36)).
Note that PHD P
θ∈Ωb λD,b(x, θ) has a MoG form. By heuris-
tic pruning of very close associated MoG terms and by neglecting
MoG terms with negligible weights, we can ensure the tractability
of this recursion. Otherwise, an exponential growth in the number
of MoG components may occur, leading to untraceable problems.
The posterior intensity, λb(x), is a summation of two MoG’s,
which can be approximated by a MoG. Hence, for each batch, the
highest MoG components present the most probable concurrently
active speakers, and the corresponding mean value indicates the
speaker’s DOA.
5. EXPERIMENTAL STUDY
5.1. Simulation setup
The proposed localization algorithm was evaluated using time-
varying simulations representing dynamic scenarios. The dimen-
sions of the acoustic enclosure are 6 × 5 × 3 m and the rever-
beration time T60 = 600 ms.
The signals were captured by a
linear array comprising eight microphones with inter-distances of
[3, 3, 3, 8, 3, 3, 3] cm, positioned in the center of the room and sam-
pled at 16 kHz with STFT frame length of 1024 with 50% overlap
and additive sensor noise with an SNR of 20 dB.
The data in the simulation comprises 15 speakers from the
TIMIT database [18]. The utterances were concatenated to a 20 sec
long section, and only 2 speakers were randomly chosen for each
simulation. We used the signal generator [19] to simulate maneuver-
ing sources. The speakers were first located in an initial DOA with
respect to the array center and began to move back and forth along
an arc of a circle with a radius of 1.5 m from the array center. The
period of the trajectory was randomly selected between 1 and 2.5
sec. We distinguish between two cases by setting different initial
DOA locations. The speakers’ initial location was ±40◦for the first
case. This scenario is designated “distant”. In the second case, the
speakers’ initial location is set to be ±15◦. This scenario is desig-
nated “near”. For each one of the cases, 40 Monte Carlo (MC) trials
were generated, and the root mean square errors (RMSE) between
the true DOAs and the estimated DOAs is presented. The baseline
algorithm [7] denoted as ˆθW H−10/20 operates in batch mode with
two batch values, 10 and 20, corresponding to STFT windows rep-
resenting ∼300 ms or ∼600 ms time frame, respectively. The
proposed algorithm is denoted ˆθPHD.
The threshold is set to achieve optimal RMSE for each MC trial
for the baseline algorithms. For the proposed algorithm, the thresh-
old was set once for all MC trials and chosen as the minimum value
required for algorithm operation.
Table 1: RMSE of the DOA estimation.
Scenario
ˆθPHD
ˆθW H−10
ˆθW H−20
“distant”
0.89◦
1.4◦
2.2◦
“near”
1.3◦
1.3◦
2.4◦
5.2. Simulation results
An illustration of one sample of the “distant” case is presented in
Fig. 1(a), demonstrating a clear advantage of the proposed tracking
algorithm. The PHD filter is operating in each STFT time frame,
yielding higher tracking resolution as compared with the baseline
algorithms, ˆθW H−10/20, which average on 10 and 20 STFT frames.
Since the DOA location may change during the group of frames,
the DOA estimation may suffer from large errors. In Table 1, we
can see that the PHD achieves an improvement of more than 30%
in the RMSE with respect to the baseline algorithm. In Fig. 2, the
raw data and ˆθPHD output illustrate that the GM-PHD clearly ig-
nores false detections due to the pruning procedure, which neglects
MoG terms with small mixture weights. We set an optimal thresh-
old level for the ˆθW H−10/20 estimators due to its high sensitivity
to this level. Since ˆθPHD estimator can handle false detections as
described above, it exhibits greater robustness across various thresh-
old levels. Smaller DOA distances, such as in the “near” case, yield
noisier DOA measurements, resulting in degradation in the RMSE
performance of ˆθPHD to the level of the baseline estimators. An il-
lustration of one sample is presented in Fig. 1(b). The intermittent
nature of the speech utterances clearly demonstrates the power of
the proposed probabilistic framework, which enables the sources to
appear/disappear at each batch of a new source.
(a) “distant”
(b) “near”
Fig. 1: Estimated DOA trajectories.
(a) “distant”
(b) “near”
Fig. 2: GM-PHD raw data and estimate trajectory.
5.3. Conclusions
We introduced a GM-PHD DOA tracking algorithm for multiple
speakers in a reverberant environment.
The proposed algorithm
leverages speech sparsity in the STFT domain to estimate a candi-
date DOA for a single time frame together with a confidence mea-
sure. The candidate DOAs are fed into the GM-PHD filter, which
manages the tracking mechanism and estimates speakers’ DOAs for
each batch. The results of our experimental study demonstrate a
30% improvement in tracking accuracy for the proposed algorithm.
Recent research on state space models incorporates deep neural
networks (DNNs) [20]. Such models can be adopted to extend our
work.
337
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 5 =====
6. REFERENCES
[1] C. Knapp and G. Carter, “The generalized correlation method
for estimation of time delay,” IEEE Transactions on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 320–327,
1976.
[2] J.H. DiBiase, H.F. Silverman, and M.S. Brandstein,
Micro-
phone arrays: signal processing techniques and applications,
chapter Robust Localization in Reverberant Rooms, pp. 157–
180, Springer Verlag, 2001.
[3] H. Ye and R. D. DeGroat, “Maximum likelihood DOA estima-
tion and asymptotic Cram´er-Rao bounds for additive unknown
colored noise,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol.
43, no. 4, pp. 938–949, 1995.
[4] B. Ottersten, M. Viberg, P. Stoica, and A. Nehorai,
Radar
Array Processing, chapter Exact and large sample ML tech-
niques for parameter estimation and detection in array process-
ing, Springer Verlag, 1993.
[5] O. Yilmaz and S. Rickard, “Blind separation of speech mix-
tures via time-frequency masking,” IEEE transactions on Sig-
nal Processing,, vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1830–1847, 2004.
[6] N. Madhu and R. Martin, “A scalable framework for multiple
speaker localization and tracking,” in International Workshop
for Acoustic Echo Cancellation and Noise Control (IWAENC),
Seattle, WA, 2008.
[7] Elior Hadad and Sharon Gannot, “Multi-speaker direction of
arrival estimation using SRP-PHAT algorithm with a weighted
histogram,” in IEEE International Conference on the Science
of Electrical Engineering in Israel (ICSEE), 2018.
[8] S. Delikaris-Manias, D. Pavlidi, V. Pulkki, and A. Mouchtaris,
“3D localization of multiple audio sources utilizing 2D DOA
histograms,” in The 24th European Signal Processing Confer-
ence (EUSIPCO), 2016, pp. 1473–1477.
[9] Ayal Schwartz, Elior Hadad, Sharon Gannot, and Shlomo E
Chazan, “Array configuration mismatch in deep doa estima-
tion: Towards robust training,” in IEEE Workshop on Applica-
tions of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA),
2023.
[10] Daniel
Fejgin,
Elior
Hadad,
Sharon
Gannot,
Zbynˇek
Koldovsky, and Simon Doclo,
“Comparison of frequency-
fusion mechanisms for binaural direction-of-arrival estimation
for multiple speakers,” in IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2024, pp.
731–735.
[11] Elior Hadad and Sharon Gannot, “Maximum likelihood multi-
speaker direction of arrival estimation utilizing a weighted
histogram,” in IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2020, pp. 586–590.
[12] M.I. Mandel, D.P.W. Ellis, and T. Jebara, “An EM algorithm
for localizing multiple sound sources in reverberant environ-
ments,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 19, pp. 953, 2007.
[13] Ofer Schwartz and Sharon Gannot, “Speaker tracking using
recursive EM algorithms,” IEEE ACM Trans. Audio Speech
Lang. Process., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 392–402, 2014.
[14] D Michael Titterington, “Recursive parameter estimation us-
ing incomplete data,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society
Series B: Statistical Methodology, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 257–267,
1984.
[15] Olivier Capp´e and Eric Moulines,
“On-line expectation–
maximization algorithm for latent data models,”
Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology,
vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 593–613, 2009.
[16] R.P.S. Mahler, “Multitarget bayes filtering via first-order mul-
titarget moments,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Elec-
tronic Systems, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 1152–1178, 2003.
[17] B.-N. Vo and W.-K. Ma, “The Gaussian mixture probability
hypothesis density filter,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Pro-
cessing, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 4091–4104, 2006.
[18] J.S. Garofolo, L.F. Lamel, W.M. Fisher, J. G Fiscus, and D.S.
Pallett, “DARPA TIMIT acoustic-phonetic continuous speech
corpus,”
NASA STI/Recon Technical Report N, vol. 93, pp.
27403, 1993.
[19] Emanu¨el AP Habets, Israel Cohen, and Sharon Gannot, “Gen-
erating nonstationary multisensor signals under a spatial co-
herence constraint,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, vol. 124, no. 5, pp. 2911–2917, 2008.
[20] Tri Dao and Albert Gu, “Transformers are SSMs: Generalized
models and efficient algorithms through structured state space
duality,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.21060, 2024.
338
Authorized licensed use limited to: Universita degli Studi di Bologna. Downloaded on February 19,2026 at 13:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
